    INTRODUCTION 
    TO ANALYSIS 
    Maxwell RosenJicht 
   Introduction to Analysis 
                 by 
        MAXWELL ROSEN,LICHcr 
          Vnivmity  of California at Bnl{eley 
          DOVER PUBLlCA'TIONS,  !N.C. 
                NewTorl{ 
            CopyrIpt  C> 1968 by Maxwen RoeenJiebt 
            AD riahta reaened  under Pan American and International Copy-
         rtpt OHlYentiona. 
            PubIiahed in Canada by General PublilhinK Company, Ltd.,  30 
          LeImiIl Road, Don Milia, 1bronto, Ontario. 
            Publlahed in the  United Kingdom by CoDItabJe and  Company. 
          Ltd. 
            This Dowr edition.  first published in 1986. ill an unabridpd  and 
          unaltered republication of the work first publiahed by Scott. Forei-
          man and CompanY. Glenview. Illinoil. in 1968. 
            Manufactured in the United States of Arneriea 
            Dowr Publieationa. Im: •• 31 East 2nd Street.  Mineola, N. Y. 11601 
          U.......,  ~ Conlftll  Catalo~ng-ln-Publlcatlon Data 
          Rc.ealieht. Maxwen. 
            Introckaetion to analysis. 
            ReprInt. Originally  published:  Glenview. In.  : Scott. Foresman. 
          and Co., l888. 
            BIbJioIraphy: p. 
            lneladea index. 
            I.  Mathematical analysis.    I.  Title. 
          QAaOO.R63  1986        516                      86-25300 
          ISBN 0-488-6&038-3 (pbk.) 
    Preface 
       This  text  is the  outgrowth  of a course given at Berkeley since 1960. 
    The object is to redo calculus correctly in a setting of sufficient generality 
    to provide a reasonable foundation for advanced work in various branches 
    of analysis. The emphasis is on abstraction,  concreteness, and simplicity. 
    A few abstract  ideas  u.re  introduced,  almost  minimal  in  number.  Such 
    important  concepts as metric space, compactness, and uniform convergence 
    are discussed in such a manner that they  will not need to be redone later. 
    They  are given concrete  illustration  and  their  worth  is demoIlstrated  by 
    using them  to prove the  results of calculus, generalized in ways that  are 
    obviously meaningful and practical. 
       The background recommended is any first course in calculus, through 
     partial differentiation and multiple integrals (although, as a matter  of fact, 
    nothing  is a88umed except for the  axioms of the  real number  system).  A 
     person completing most of the material in this book should not only have 
     a respectable compreheD8ion of basic real analysis but should also be ready 
     to  take  serious COUl'8ell  in  such  subjects  as  integration  theory,  complex 
     variable,  differential  equatioD8, other  topics  in  analysis,  and  general 
     topology. Experience indicates that  this  material  is acC688ible to  a wide 
     range of students,  including many with primary  interests  outside mathe-
     matics,  provided there  is a stre88 on the easier problems. 
       The quest for simplicity has resulted  in the elimination  of a host of 
     mathematical  synonyms  and  the  omi88ion or relegation  to  the  problem 
     sets of a number of important  ideas. Some problems, easily recognizable, 
     &88ume a familiarity  with  linear  algebra  that  was considered unwise to 
     presume of all students.  Indeed only a few simple facts on determinant. 
     are needed for the  chapters  on multivariable  calculus, but  things  are Il1O 
     arranged that the instructor who wishes to avail himself of the conveniencee 
     of linear algebra may easily do 80 with no break in continuity.  Differential 
     forms were excluded, regrettably,  to avoid exorbitant  algebraic detours. 
       This  text  can be used for courses ranging in length  from one to t.wo 
     quarters.  The original semester course at Berkeley coveled the first eight 
     chapters, with the omission of most of the third section of the eiPth chapter. 
     At  present  Berkeley  has  a  two-quarter  sequence with  the  first  quarter, 
     IIIOmewhat sped up, covering the first six chapters and parts of the seventh. 
       Here are 80me comments on the individual chapters. Chapter I, which 
     discusses material on basic set theory thu.t is familiar to many students, can 
     be covered very rapidly.  Chapter  II gives a brief account of how all the 
     properties  of the  real  numbers  can  be deduced from a few axioms. This 
         material  can all10 be covered  rapidly.  It should not be bypassed,  however, 
         for contrary  to a widespread faith  in modern pedagogy, my experience has 
         been that  time  spent  here  is not  wasted.  Chapters  III  and  IV, on metric 
         spaces and continuous  functions,  are the meat  of the book. They  must be 
         done  with  great  care.  After  this,  Chapters  V,  VI,  and  VII  flow along 
         smoothly,  for  their  substance  (elementary  calculus)  is familiar  and  the 
         proofs now make sense. Chapter  VIII,  which is about  existence theorems, 
         is of a slightly  greater  order of difficulty. One may save some time by going 
         very  lightly  over  the  implicit  function  theorem  if it is intended  to do the 
         general case later,  in the following chapter.  The last section of  the chapter 
         treats  ordinary  differential  equations,  and  the  classroom  discussion  of 
         these  may with  relative  impunity  be restricted  to the very  first theorem. 
         Chapters  IX and X, on multivariable  calculus,  conclude the  book. They 
         should  cause  no  difficulty  for  anyone  who  has  come  this  far.  However, 
         omitting  them entirely  would be preferable to an attempt  to rush through. 
              It is impossible to write a text such as this without  an obvious indebted-
         ness to J. Dieudonn6's classic Poundationa oj M adem Anal".,.  My gratitude 
         is also due  my colleagues of the  curricular  reform  committee  at Berkeley 
         which instituted  the new Mathematics  104 course, to Mrs. Sandra Cleveland 
         for writing  up my original lectures,  to Adam Koranyi,  whose revised notes 
          have  long  been  in use,  for  many  conversations,  to  numerous  other  col-
          leagues  and  students  for their  comments,  to my  family  for  its  patience, 
          and to Scott,  Foresman and Company  for its affable efficiency. 
          Berkeley,  California                                     Maxwell Rosenlicht 
          Contents 
             CHAPTER I. NOTIONS FROM SET THEORY                                                       I 
                               II.   Sets and elements. Subsets                                       J 
                               12.   Operations on Beta                                               40 
                               13.  Functions                                                         • 
                               14.  Finite and infinite sets                                         10 
                                     Problema                                                        11 
            CHAPTER II.  TIlE  REAL NUMBER SYSTDI                                                    II 
                               11.  The fteJd propertiea                                             16 
                               12.   Order                                                           19 
                               13.  The Ieut upper bound property                                    • 
                               • 4.  The exilltence of square roots                                  18 
                                     Pro~~                                                           • 
           CHAPTER III.  METRIC  SPACES                                                              as 
                               11.  Definition of metric apace. Examples                             It 
                               12.  Open and closed seta                                             11 
                               13.  Converpnt  aequencea                                             " 
                           ..  14.  CompJetenelll                                                    11 
                               • 5.  Compactnell                                                     " 
                               16.  Connectednell                                                    It 
                                     Problema                                                        6J. 
            CIIAPTER  IV. CONTINUOUS Ft1NCTIONS                                                      " 
                               11.  Definition of continuity. Examp1et                               .. 
                               12.  Continuity  and limits                                           71 
                               13.  The continuity of rational  operationl.  PuacIioDI 
                                      with valuea in •                                               'II 
                               14.  CoDtinUOUI functions on a compact met.ric ....                   .,. 
                               15.  CoDtinuoua functions on a 00DIleCted ..........                  • 
                               16.  8equeneea of functions                                           • 
                                      Problems                                                       .. 
             CHAPTER V. DIFFEIIENTJATION                                                           '  " 
                                11.  The defiDitiOD of derivative                                    • 
                                12.  Ru1et of dilerentiation                                        _ 
                                ta.  The,IIlMIl value &Iaeore                                       _ 
                                14.  TayIor'.  ~                                                    .. 
                                      Problema                                                      1. 
           CIUPTER  VI. RIEMANN INTEGRATION                                                     111 
                              II.   Definitiou  and examples                                    111 
                              12.  Linearity and order properties of the integral               116 
                              13.  Existence of the integral                                    118 
                              14.  The fundamental theorem of ealcuIua                          lIS 
                              15.  The logarithmic and exponential functions                     III 
                                    Problems                                                     131 
          aIAPI'EIl  VII.  INTERCHANGE OF UMIT  OPERATIONS                                       117 
                              II.   Integration  and ditterentiation  of aequences 
                                    of functions                                                 lSI 
                              12.  Infinite aeries                                               1'1 
                              13.  Power I8ries                                                  ISO 
                              14.  The tripnometric  functioaa                                   156 
                              16.  OOfereatiation under the intecral lip                         119 
                                    ~                                                            1~ 
         CILU'TBR  VID. TIlE MBTIIOD OF StJa:ESS1VE  APPROXIMATIONS  169 
                              11.  The fixed point theorem                                       170 
                              U.  TIle aim.pleat cue of the implicit function  theorem           I71 
                              I a.  Exiet.ence and UIliquena  tbeoremI for ordinary 
                                    dilerential  equatioIIB                                      177 
                                    Problema                                                     190 
           CIIAPI'BR IX. PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIATION                                                19S 
                              11.  DefiDitiona and bailie propertiee                             1M 
                              12.  JDcher derivatives                                            .1 
                              13.  The implieit function theonm                                  _ 
                                    Problema                                                     IU 
            CILU'TBR  X. MULTIPLE INTEGRALS                                                      III 
                              11.  BiImun intep.tion  OD ..... interval in ... 
                                     _plea and bailie propertiea                                 116 
                               ,2.  ErIeteece of the in"",.  lD .... tion  OD 
                                     arbitrary  .. baeta of ... Volume                           III 
                               13.  Iterated intepaJa                                            .1 
                               ,f.  0IIup of variable                                            ISS 
                                     Problema                                                    Mt 
          8VCGBITION8  lOR FURTHER  RUDING                                                       U9 
          INDEX                                                                                  lSI 
  Introduction to Analysis 
     CHAPTER  1 
     Notions from' Set Theory 
                  Bet theory  is the languap  of mMhematicl. Tbe 
                mOlt  complicated  ideas  in  modern mathematies are 
                developed in terma of the basic nodo.  of let theory • 
               . Fortunately  the grammar.and vocabuluy  of ... theory 
                are extremely simple, at least in the .... that it. poe-
                aible to 10 very  far in mathematiClil with 001,. a ema11 
                amount of set theory.  It so happens that the subject 01 
                let  theory  not  only  underlies mathernatiee  but  baa 
                become itlelf an extensive braneh of atudy;  however we 
                do not enter deeply into  this Itudy  beeauae there it DO 
                need  to. All we mUlt do here it familiarise ouneIv. 
                with some of the baaie ideas 10 that the lan&uace ...., be 
                11Ied with precision. A fint  readilll  of tbiI chapter can 
                be very rapid ainee it i. mainly a matter of pttinc WIld 
                to a few worda. There i. oocuional verboeity t directed 
                toward  the  clarification  of certain  simple ideas  which 
                are really somewhat  more subtle  than they &ppeU'. 
              I      I.  NOTIONS  no .. IIIIT THlIOaT 
                                                                            fl.  SETS AND ELEMENTS. SUBSETS. 
                      We do not attempt  to define the word.,.  Intuitively  a set is a collec-
              tion, or ",gregale,  or famil'll, or en.semble (all of which words are used synony-
              mously with set) of objects which are called the elementa, or member. of the 
              set, and the set is completely determined  by the knowledge of which objects 
              are elements of it. We may speak, for  example, of the set of students  at a 
               certain. univenity;  the elements of thie set are the individual students  there. 
              Similarly we may lpeak  of the set of all real numbel'l  (to be diacuased in 
              eome detail  in the  next chapter),  or the set of aliitraight  lines in a given 
               plane, etc. It Ihould be noted that the elements of a set may themselves be 
               sets; for example each element of the set of allitraight  lines in a given plane 
               ia a set of points, and we may alao consider such 1881 mathematical  examples 
               .. the set of married couples in a given town, or the set of regiments in an 
               army. 
                       We ehalI generally  use capital  lettel'l  to denote  sets  and  lower-cue 
               letters to denote their  elementa. The Iymbol  E  is used to denote  member-
               ehip in a set, 10 that 
                                                                            zES 
               means that z is an element of the set S. The ltatement  "z ia not an element 
               of S" is abbreviated 
                                                                            zf!S. 
               Inatead  of  writing  a E  S,  b E S,  c E  S  (the  commu  having  the  arne 
                meaning .. "and")  we often write a, b, c E s. 
                        The atatement  that a set is completely determined  by ita elements may 
                be written  .. followa: If X and  Yare sets then  X  .. Y if and only if, for 
                all z, z E  X if and only if z E Y. Equality  here and elsewhere in thia book 
                (denoted by -) means identity;  X and  Y happen to be different Iymbola, 
                but they may very well be different names for the same set, in which case 
                the equation  X - Y means that the sets indicated  by the symbols X aad 
                Y are  the same.  X" Y of COUJ'le means that  the  sets  indicated  by  the 
                aymbola X and  Y are not the same. 
                        ThUi we imagine oUJ'lelves in a world peopled by certain  "objects" 
                (certain  of which are  called "sets"),  and  for some pail'l  of objects  z,  X, 
                wh .. X is a set, we write:e E  X, the symbol  E  having the property  that 
                lwo ... X and Y are equal if and only if for each object z we have z E  X 
                if and only if :Ie E  Y. The symbol E  mUit alao bave other properties  (which 
                we dan't specify here) that enable UB, given certain sets, to construct  otheJ'l. 
                The important tbina is tbat everything which followa is expreBlible in terms 
                01 the fundamental  relation  z E  X. 
                                                               tl._AllD  .........       II 
              Seta are IOmetinuw iDdieated by Iiaciq  III their members between 
         br&cell. For example, the _ 
                                           IJaoe, Jim} 
         baa Jane and .nm .. ita memben, 
                                           (1, 2,3,  ••. ) 
         (with the three dote I'e8d Uaod 10 on")  ie the _  of poeitive inteprB. and 
                                                f-t  . 
         ia the _   having one element. the object  named _. (Note that  f G J ie not 
         the aame .... In the aame way theN ia a ditferenee between a university 
         cluB coDIIiatiDg of one atudent aod the atudent hilDll8lf, or between a com-
         mittee 00DIIiat.i1ll of one peraon and that peraon.) The above notation how-
         ever is not always feuible.  A more frequendy  used notation is 
                                  Iz : (statement involving s)J, 
         which meaoa the aet of all z for which the statement  involving z ia true. 
         Thus 
                                   (s : z ie a poeitive integerJ 
         ia the aet of positive intepra,  and for any aet 8 we have 
                                         8 - fz: zE8). 
         For any aet 8, the aymboI 
                                fs E 8 : (atatement  involviDg z») 
         deDotea the -.me set .. 
                            (z : :i E 8 and (statement involving z) J , 
          which ia the let of all elements of 8 for which the atatement ia true. Thus 
          if R is the .. of real numbers, 
                                   Iz E R : :r:I- l' - (1,  -I). 
               If X and  Y are aeta and every element of X is al80 an element of Y. 
          we a.y that X is a ...., of Y; this is written 
                                       XC Y,  or  Y:JX. 
          Thus  XC Y ie ahorthand  for  the  atatement  "if  z E  X  then  s E  Y". 
          X - Y is equivalent to the two atatements X C  Y and Y C X. If X C  Y 
          aod Y C Z then clearly  X C z; the two &nst atatements are IOmetimea 
          written more aucoinotly                                            . 
                                            XcYCZ. 
                   ,         I.  NO'l'IONa  noll 811T TRIIORT 
                   For auy object  z  and  set  X  the  relation  z E  X  can  now be  written  in 
                    another  (1_ convenient I) way, namely  (zl  eX. The negation of X C Y 
                   •  written                                                          Xtl, Y  or  Y~X. 
                    X. called a JWOPII' eubuI 0/ Y if XC Y but X,. Y. 
                               The em", .., •  the set with no elements. It is denoted by the symbol 
                    91. A IOUI'Ce of confusion to beKinnel'l •  that although  t.he empty let oon-
                    taint  noCIam"  it i .... f is lOfMIAing (namely lOme particular  let,  the  one 
                    characterised by the fact. that. nothing is in it.). The set. (911 •  a let. con-
                    tainilll exactly one element, namely the empty set. (In a similar way, when 
                    dea1in1 
                                         with numbers, lay wit.h ordinary  intepl'l,  we mUit. be careful not 
                     to reprd  the number aero 81 nothing: 181'0 is something, a part.icular num-
                     ber, which repreeents the number of thinp in "nothing".  Thus 181'0 and 91 
                     are quite different, but there is a connection between them in that  the set 
                     91 hu IeIO elements.) Note that  for any set X we have 
                                                                                     III C X  and  XC X. 
                     A epecial cue of both of these statements  is the statement 
                                                                                                        III C Ill, 
                     which occuiont  diJlloulty iI, u  is often  improperly  done,  one ......  'Ije 
                     oontailled in" for both of the symbole C  and  E. The statement  III C III 
                     ia tNe becalMe the statement  "for each z E III we have z E Ill" is obviouely 
                     true,  and  allO  because it is "vacuously  true",  that  is there  is DO z E III 
                     for which the statement  must be verified, just. u  the statement  "all  pip 
                     with winp apeak Chineee" is vacuously true. 
                                                                                                                                      I Z.  OPERATIONS ON SETS. 
                                  If X and Yare aete, the inter.edion 0/ X and Y, denoted by X ("\ Y, is 
                      defined to be the set of all objects which are both  elements of X and ele-
                      ments of Y. In eymbole, 
                                                                     X ("\ Y ....  (z : z E X  and  z E YI. 
                                  The union oJ X and Y, denoted XU Y, is the Bet of all objects which 
                      are elements of at leut one of the Bets X and  Y. That i8. XU Y is the set 
                      of all objects which are either elemente of X or elements of Y (or of both), 
                      ineymboll 
                                                                       XUY- (z:zEX  or  zEYJ. 
                       The word "or"  is ueed here in the manner that is standard  in mathematica. 
                       In ordinary  language  the word "or"  is often exclusive, that is, if A and B 
                       are statements,  then  II A  or B" is underetood  to mean  "A or B  but  not 
                       both",  whereu in mathematice it altDtJlI' meane" A or B, or both A and B". 
                                                                                   ,2.  0 ....... 0 ... 011 .....    I 
                  If X ia a aubaet of a .. 8, then the ~ oJ X .. 8 ia the .. 01 
           all e1ementa of 8 which ..... not elementa of X. If it ia expIieltly Itated, or 
           clear from the context, euctly  what the set 8 is. we often omit the wordI 
           "in 8"  and 11M the notation ex for the complement of X. TbU is 
                                                ex - fsEB: sf! XI. 
                  Th .. operations ..... illustrated in Fipre 1, where the leta in queetioD 
           are seta of pointa in plane repone bounded by curves. 
                           xny                                  XUy                                     ex 
                                    FrOUD 1. Intenect.ion, union, and oompIemenL 
                   For another example, let 8 be the set of real numbenl, aDd let 
                             X  -    (s E 8: s ~ 11,  Y - (s E 8: 0 ~ s S 11. 
            (The symbols  ~ and S will be defined later.) Then 
                                              X/,,\Y- III 
                                              XVY- (sE8:s~OI 
                                                   eX-lzE8:s<-1I. 
                   Certain relationa hold among the symbols  A, V, e. For example, if 
            X and Yare aubeeta of & set 8, then 
                                                 eX A eY - e(X V V). 
            This is illustrated in Figure 2. A proof of tbia fonnula ia civen below. 
                  FJOUIIII  2.  eX ilshaded  1111, eY ilshaded  = , e(X v  Y) illhadecl HH. 
                                            iDuIf.ratIIIr ex f'\ eY - e(X v  y). 
                  •       ••  NOTIONS  nIOll  SlIT TllIIOBY 
                 ExncIsB.  Prove that if xes, Yes, then eX ("\ e Y =  e(x v  Y). 
                  It mlllt  he ahown that  the two seta have the _me elementa, in other worda that  each 
                  element  of the set on the left ill an element of the set on the ript and vice vera. 
                          If z E  ex f"I eY,  then  z E  eX  and  z E  eY.  Tbia  means  that  z E 8,  z e: X, 
                  z E Y. Since z e: X, z e: Y, we know that. z e:X V  Y. Hence z E e(X V  Y). 
                          Conversely, if  z E e(X V  Y),  then  z E 8  and  z e: X V  Y.  Therefore  z e: X 
                  and z e: Y. ThIl8 z E eX and z E  eY, 10 that  z E  eX f"I eY. Thill completee  the 
                  proal. 
                            If X  and  Y  are  seta,  the  notation  X -                                                     Y  is  BOmetimes used  for 
                   (s EX: x f1. YI.  Thus  if  X  and  Y  are  8Ubseta of  BOme set  S,  then 
                  X - Y - X("\eY. 
                            Two seta are said to be diajoinl  if they  have  no element  in common. 
                  That is, X and  Y are disjoint  if X ("\ Y = flJ. A collection of any  number 
                  of. leta is aid to be disjoint  if every  two of the sets are disjoint. 
                      .      The intersection  and  union  of more than  two seta may be defined in 
                   an obvious manner.  For example, if X, Y, Z ar.e seta then 
                                          X ("\ Y ("\ Z -                   Ix : % E X, x E Y,  x E ZI, 
                   and 
                                          XVYVZ- (x:sEX  or  xEY  or  xEZI. 
                   Clearly  X ("\ Y ("\ Z ... (X ("\ Y) ("\ Z ==  X ("\ (Y ("\ Z),  and  similarly  for 
                   the  union  of  three  seta.  More  generally  the  intersection  and  union  of 
                   arbitrary  families of seta may be defined, and in an obvious way. The only 
                   problem  is finding an  adequate  notation  for an arbitrary  family  of seta, 
                   and tbia is done .. folloW1l. Let 1 be any set and  for each i E 1 let Xi be 
                   another  set  (80 that  we may .peak of 1 as being an induing  /4miI7l, whoee 
                   elementa are irtdit:u used to specify the seta at which we direct  our main 
                   attention).  The set of all seta Xi" i ranges over 1 is denoted 
                                                                         (X, : i Ell  or  (X,I., 
                    and  the  interaedion and  union of tbia  family  of seta,  together  with  their 
                    respective  conventional  symbols, are defined by 
                                                    ("\ X, - (x: for each i E 1, x E X,I, 
                                                    .• , 
                                                    V Xi'"  (x : for at least one i E  I, z E X.I. 
                                                    ie, 
                    EXBRCIBB.  Prove  that  if  1  and  S  are  seta  and  if  for  each  i E 1  we 
                    have X, C S, then e«("\ X,)  - V  (eX,). 
                                                                    iEl                    iE' 
                    It. __ he Ibowa t.ba\ eacb element  of the let OD the left ill an element  of the let on the 
                    .................. 
                                                                           • 2.  OP:lJU.TlOJlB  ON UTI     7 
                H z E e( "X,) then  z E 8 and z E "X,. Therefore z E X"  fOl' at least one 
                           fEI                              .EI 
          ;  E  1. Thus z E  eX" 10 that z E  U (ex,). 
                                                  IEr 
                Converaely, if z E  U (eX.),  then fOl' lOme;  E 1 we have z E  ex" Thus z E 8 
                                     'el 
           and z E X,. Since z E X, we have z E "  X,. Therefore z E e(" X,). This comp\eta 
                                                       lei                        lei 
           the proof. 
                 If G and  b are objects,  by  the  ordered ptJir (G, b)  we mean the  two 
           objects G and b in a definite order, G first, b second. Thus  if G,  b, e, d are 
           objects then (G, b) == (e, d) if and only if G = e and b - d. Note the distinc-
           tion between (G, b) and (G, bl i the latter is a set with two elements (unlefl8, 
           of COU1'8e, G happens to equal li, in which case (G, b J - (a I, a set with one 
           element), and  la, hI can equally well be written  (b, aI, spoiling the order. 
           We remark that  instead  of introducing  the  new concept "ordered  pair" 
           into set theory,  we can actually  define the ordered pair (a, b) in terms of 
           the  primitive  notions about  sets  that  we already  have:  we set  (a, b) ... 
           I(al, (G, bll. This  definition  does precisely what  we want:  to  any  two 
           objects a, b (distinct or not) it auigns  an object (a, b), and it does this in 
           such a faeruon that  (a, b) - (e, d) if and only if a ... e and b =- d. 
                 Given two sets X and  Y we define the cartuian  prod4ld (or prodtACl) 
           oj X and Y, denoted  X X Y, to be the set of all ordered pairs the  fint 
           member of which is in X, the second in Y, that is 
                                     X X Y = (x, y)  : x E X, y E YI. 
                 Ordinary rectangular coordinates in the plane give the uaual pictorial 
            representation  of the cartesian product:  the whole plane can be identified 
           with the product of the two coordinate axes. In Figure 3 there is a niore 
           complicated picture in which X, Y are subsets of the two coordinate axes 
           and the cartesian product is a ~baet of the first quadrant. 
                                                      •     • 
                                                      I I 
                                             FioUBII 3.  Cartesian  product. 
          8     I.  NOTIONS  FROM  SilT  THEORY 
                                                                                      13.  FUNCI'IONS. 
                If X and  Yare sets, by a function from X to Y  (or a Junction Jrom X 
          into Y, or a function on X with value8 in Y) is meant a rule which associates 
          with each element of X a definite element of Y.  (The word mapping, or 
           map, is often used instead of function.) The "rule"  can he given in many 
           ways, some of which are discussed below, but  the essential thing is that 
           given any element of X there is associated, somehow, some definite element 
           of Y. Two functions from X to Y are considered equal if and only if both 
           functions associate with each specific element of X the same element of Y. 
                 Functions are usually denoted by small letters,  such as J. The state-
           ment "J is a function from X to  Y" is often written 
                                                     J:X-Y. 
           For any a: E  X, the element of Y that the function J associates with z (the 
           value 01 J at :r)  is  denoted I(a:). Thus  if J:  X -              Y  and  g: X -       Y  then 
           1-g if and only if I(z)  - g(a:) for all a: E  X. W~ say that J smds a: into 
           I(z),  or that I map8 a: into I (a:) , or that :r and I(z)  correspond under J. 
                 The rule defining a given function I: X -                Y may be given in various 
           ways. One way, which is usually not very practir.al, is to list all the elements 
           of X, listing with each one the corresponding one of Y. Or the rule may be 
           given by a mathematical formula. For example, if X and Y are both taken 
           to be the set H of real numbers, an equation like 
                                                fez) = Zl + 3z - 2 
           defines a  real-valued function J on H i in such a  case one often  speaks 
            (imprecisely I) of the  function :r' + ax - 2. Again, if X is a subset of H, 
           a real-valued function on X may be given geometrically by its graph, that 
            is the set of points I (a:, I(z»  : z E  XI in the plane; note that this method 
            mayor may not be practical, depending on what f is like, for it may not be 
            possible to "draw"  the Rl'aph. In  fact  any subset  of the  plane defines a 
            real-valued function on a subset of the real numbers, provided that  any 
            vertical  line (z - constant)  intersects the  lubset  of the  plane in at most 
            one point. Finally we remark that  the "rule"  defining a function need not 
            be practically  computable. For example, for z any  real number, let I(a:) 
            denote that integer 0, 1, ... , 9 which is in the billionth decimal place of :r 
            (to  be precile, since a  real number a:  may have  more than  one decimal 
            representation,  88 in 1.0000 ...  = .9999 ... , we might better  take J(a:) to 
            he the smallest possible integer in the  billionth decimal place of :r);  this 
            rule gives an honest-to-goodness function I: H -                 H, but who would hazard 
            a guess 88 to the value of 1(11'), or even 1(...;7J.)1 
                  Though this is in no way essential for what follows, we remark that 
            it is easy to define the notion of function in terms of more primitive concepts 
            of set theory, 88 follows: If X and Yare sets, a function from X into Y is a 
            subset of X X Y with the property  that  for any x E  X there is one and 
                                                                               13.  ruNCftONI    9 
         only one 1/ E  Y such that  (z, 1/) is in the subset.  If the function  is denoted 
         J: X -    Y then the unique 1/ referred to above is, of COUl'lle, J(:e). In analOl)' 
         with  the  case of  real-valued  functiona' on  the  real  numbers,  this  lubeet 
          I (z, J(z»  : z E  X I of X X Y is called the graph of the function,  10 that 
          we are again saying that the graph detennines  the function. 
                                                             1 
               FrOUD 4. Graph of the function I: R -+ R liven  by I(~) - Zl far aU s E •. 
                It is useful to note  that  the word  "function"  alone can be defined in 
          primitive  terms,  not  only  the  more  complete  concept  "function  flOm X 
          into  Y": a function  is an ordered  pair  whose first  member  ill an ordered 
          pair  of sets, say  (X, V),  and  whose second  member  is a  function  flOm 
          X into  Y. That is, a function  is IOmething of the type  «X, y),  (a certain 
          kind of subset  of X  X y». This  emphasizes that  the I8tI X and  Y are to 
          be conaidered &8 easential parts of the function J:X -              Y. For many  pur-
          poI8I  it is important  to bear  this  fact  in mind,  but molt  often  we do not 
          make any explicit mental note of it. For example, if I: X -             Y is a fUllCUon 
          and  Y is a subset  of another  set  Y',  then  we set a function I': X -          Y' by 
          setting  J'(z)  - J(z)  for all :e E  X,  that  is, living  I' the same  II'&Ph "I, 
          which  il  pouible  since  X  X Y C  X  X V'.  Although  I  and I' &1'8  really 
           different  functions,  we  uaually  denote  them  by  the  same  Iymbol,  even 
           writing  down the technically  incorrect  expl'ellion J: X -          V'.  In the same 
           way, liven  any function I: X -        Yand any subset  X" of X, we can de&ne 
           a  function  1": X" -      Y by I"(z)  -/(z)  for all z E  X"; I" is called the 
           rearictioR  011 to X". Of course, I" is not  the same &8 I, though we olten 
           denote  them  by the same .ymhol,  for example by writing  the technically 
           incorrect  expl'ellion J: X" -      Y when there is no danger of confUlion, The 
           graph of the latter  function is of COUl'lle a subeet of the graph of the oriPnai 
           function!:  X -     Y, since X" X Y C X X Y. 
                If !: X -    Y and,:  Y - Z are functiona,  one can define the ctnrapoft-
           lion 01 J and"  or compoaedJunctioR, a function flOm X into Z, by &8IOCiating 
           to each element of X an element of Z in the obvious way: given an element 
           of 
              X, one fint uses J to get an element of Y, then one U8eI ,  to get flOm this 
         10    I.  NOTlON8  FROM  8ET THEORY 
         last  element an element of Z. The composed function is usually denoted 
         go 1,80 that  we have 
                                            go/:  X-Z, 
         with (g 0  I) (x)  =  g(J(x»  for each x E  X. 
              A function I: X -      Y  is called one-to-one, or one-one, if different ele-
         mente of X correspond under I to different elements of Y, that is if l(xl)  -
         I(~oi) only if ~l - 2: ••  A function I: X -  Y is called onto if each element of 
         Y corresponds under 1 to .orne element of X, that is if each y E  Y is of the 
         form 11 -/(x),  for lOme x E X.  If /: X -         Y is both  one-one and  onto 
         it is called one-one onto, or a one-one correapoodence between X and Y. An 
         example of a function that  is one-one onto is, for any set  X, the identity 
         lunction ix:  X -X, given by ix(x)  =  2:  for all x E  X.  (Note  that  what 
         goes under  the  name "the function x"  in elementary  calculus is actually 
         the identity  function on the set of real numbers.) If I: X -         Y  is one-one 
         onto then each element of Y corresponds under I to one and only one ele-
         ment of 
                   X, 80 we can define a function I-I:  Y -    X by!-I(y)  =  2: if y =  I (x). 
         !-I  it called  the  ,,,,,erae Junction oj J,  and  is 0.180 one-one onto.  Clearly 
         (Jl)-I  .. J, and!-I  0 I =  ix, lol""l = iy. 
               If J: X -  Y is a function and X' C X, then the subset of Y given by 
                                     J(X/ =  1/(2:) : 2: E X'} 
                                           ) 
          (where the last symbol is shorthand  for Iy : there exists x E  X' such that 
          y - I(x)!)  is called the 'mtJ{/e 01 X' under I,  or simply the imtJ{/e 01 X', if 
          there is no danger of confusion. The two UBeI we have made for the symbol 
         1 ( ) are  related  by  the  equation 
                                I«~J) - II(~)J for each 2: E  X. 
               If I: X -   Y is a function and  Y' C Y, then the subset of X given by 
                                  I-I(Y,)  -  Ix EX: I(x) E yl} 
          is called the ,,,,,erae imOfe 01 Y' under I. It consists of those elemente of X 
          which correspond under I to elements of Y'.  If I: X -          Y  happens to  be 
          one-one onto we have another use for the symbol I-I,  namely the inverse 
          function!-I:  Y -   X. These two uses of I-I must be carefully distinguished, 
          though confusion rarely arises. If I: X -      Y  is Olle-Olle onto  then  the two 
          uses of !-I are related by  fJ-l(y)!  -= I-I({y\)  for e&<~h y E  Y. 
                                                     ,4.  FINITE  AND INFINITE  SETS. 
               We are familiar with the  set of positive integers, or natural numbJa 
          11, 2, 3, •.. }. This set, together with the various ideas associated with it, 
          INCh as ite ordering (the fact that  its elements can be written  down in a 
          de8Dlte order), or wch as the fact that  two of ita elements may be added 
                                                                             14.  I'lNITII  AND INI'lNITII  IIIITII    11 
            to obtain  a third  with certain  general rules holding for this  addition,  can 
            be obtained  from the primitive  principles of set theory. In this text we shall 
            instead  &8Bume the  buic  properties  of the  real number  system  and  from 
            those  derive all the  properties  of the set  11,2,3,  ... 1. In this section  we 
            Bhall for convenience 8BBume a few simple facts about  the natural  numbe ... 
            in order  to get u  quickly  u  possible to certain  other  eBBy matte...  of set 
            theory.  However  all the  facts  about  the  set of natural  numbe ... that  are 
            uaed here will be proved explicitly in the next chapter.  The notions devel-
            oped in this section will not be applied until later, so no circular reuoning 
            OCCUl'l. 
               Let us therefore  &8Bume knowledge of the set  11,2,3,  ... 1. A set  X is 
            called finite  if it is empty  or there  is a positive integer  n such that  X can 
            be  put  into  one-one  correspondence  with  the  set  11,2 •... , nl,  that  is 
            there  is a one-one function  from  /1,2 •...• nlonto  X. Thus a set is finite 
            if we can count its elements and run out of elements after we count a certain 
            number, say n, of them. The number n depends only on the set X, not on 
            the  order  in  which its elements  are counted  off j n is called the number 0/ 
            elementB in X. For oompleteness we say that the number of elements in the 
            empty set is zero. Any subset of a finite set is itBelf finite, and if it is a proper 
            subset  it hu a smaller number of elements. 
                   A set  is infinite  if it  is  not  finite.  This  means  that  we can  pick  an 
             element ZI EX. then an element ZI from the complement of I ZI),  then an 
             element z. from the complement  of IZI. ZI).  etc .• and  we never run out of 
             elements  of X. Thus there  exist distinct  elements SI, Sa. S •••••  in X. 
                    It is eBBy to show that a set X is infinite if and only if it may be put 
             into one-one correspondence with a proper subset of itself. To do this, note 
             first that if X  is finite then  any proper subset hu a smaller number of ele-
             ments.  whereas two finite sets in one-one correspondence  must  have  the 
             same  number  of elements.  This proves  the  "if"  part.  On the other  hand, 
             if  X  is infinite  then  there  exist  distinct  elements  ZI, ZI. Sa ••••  in  X.  The 
             complement of IZI. ZI, ZI,  ••• 1 in X is a subset  Y. so that 
                          X = IZI. ZI. ZI,  ••• 1 U  Y  and  IZI. Sa. Z"  ••• 1 r'\ Y =  flJ. 
             A one-one correspondence between X and its proper subset  I ZI. ZI,  ••• 1 U  Y 
             is given by the function  which sends each z. into Z.+l and each element of 
              Y into itself. This proves the "only  if" part.  completing the proof. 
                    The set of natural  numben  can be used to give an eBBy definition of 
             the notion of sequence. A 8equence 0/ n element8 in a 8et X, or an n-'up16 0/ 
             elementB 0/ X. may be defined to be a function  from  11, 2. : ..• n 1 into  Xi 
              ifthefunctionisdenoted/andwewrite/(l)                             = zl,/(2)  - Sa, •• •• /(n)  - z., 
              then  the  n-tuple  is often  written  (ZI, ZI •••• , z.).  An  infinite  8equmc:e 0/ 
              elements 0/ X  (or a 86qumc:6  0/ elements  0/ X, if  there  isn't  any  danger  of 
              confusion with  finite sequences)  is a  function  from the set of all natural 
              numben  into  Xi  u  above  this  can  be  written  (ZI. Sa. ZI •••• ).  or.  more 
              conventionally.  ZI. Sa, ZI •••• ,  or  sometimes  Iz"I_.I •••.•.• 
            11  I.  JIIOI'rONlI  I'BOII  IIIIT TRIIORT 
           PROBLEMS 
             1.  Let R be the eat or real numbera and let the symbols <, :S have their CODV8Il-
                  tlonal JllMlMp 
                  (a)  Show that 
                    .   Iz e R : 0 :S z :S 31 "  I z e R : -1 < z < 11 - Iz e R : 0 :S z < 11.' 
                  (b)  Lilt the elementll or 
                        (11,3, 'I V (~E R : zI- 4z + 3 - OJ) ,,(z E R : -1 :S. < 31. 
                  (0)  Show that 
                         <t. E R : -I:S z:S 01 V (z e R : I <. < '\)" I~ e R: O:S.:S  3) 
                                               -   (s E R : I < z:S 81 VIOl. 
              2.  U A is a aubeet or the eat 8, ehow that 
                  (a)  e(eA)  - A 
                  (b)  A V A - A "A - A V flJ - A 
                  (0)  A "flJ - flJ 
                  (d)  A X flJ - flJ. 
              a.  Let A, B, 0 be IIlbeetll or a eat 8. Prove the foUowinl etatementll and illustrate 
                  them with diatrama. 
                  <a)  eA V  eB - e(A "B) 
                  (b)  A n(BVO)  - (A "B) V(A "0) 
                  (c)  A V (B "0) - (A VB)" (.4. V 0). 
              '- U A, B, 0 are I8te, show that 
                  (a)  (A - B) ,,0 - (A "0) - B 
                  (b)  (A VB) - (A "B) - (A - B) V (B - A) 
                  (c)  A - (B - 0) - (A :.. B) V (A "B "0) 
                  (d)  (A - B) X 0 - (A X 0) - (B X 0). 
              5.  Let 1 be a nonempty eat and for each i  e 1 let Xc be a set. Prove that 
                   (a)  for any eat B we have                                                               . 
                                                  B" V XI - V (B "X.) 
                                                         'er         'er 
                   (b)  if each X. is a aubeet or a given eat 8, then 
                                                      e( V  XI) - " eX,. 
                                                          feller 
              6 ..  Prove that if f: X .... Y, ,: Y .... Z, and 1a: z .... W are functions, then 
                                                 "  •  CtJ  • n - (Ia • ,> ·f· 
              7.  Letf:X .... Y be a function, let A and B be IIlbeetll or X, and let 0 and D be 
                   .. baete or Y. Prove that 
                   (a>  I(A VB) -/(A)  V/(B) 
                   (b)  I(A "B) C/(A) "/(B) 
                   (0)  t-I(O V D) - 1-'(0)  V t-I(D) 
                   (d)  1-'(0" D> - r(O) "t-I(D) 
                   (e)  ,-a(f(A»:> A 
