    INTRODUCTION 
    TO ANALYSIS 
    Maxwell RosenJicht 
   Introduction to Analysis 
                 by 
        MAXWELL ROSEN,LICHcr 
          Vnivmity  of California at Bnl{eley 
          DOVER PUBLlCA'TIONS,  !N.C. 
                NewTorl{ 
            CopyrIpt  C> 1968 by Maxwen RoeenJiebt 
            AD riahta reaened  under Pan American and International Copy-
         rtpt OHlYentiona. 
            PubIiahed in Canada by General PublilhinK Company, Ltd.,  30 
          LeImiIl Road, Don Milia, 1bronto, Ontario. 
            Publlahed in the  United Kingdom by CoDItabJe and  Company. 
          Ltd. 
            This Dowr edition.  first published in 1986. ill an unabridpd  and 
          unaltered republication of the work first publiahed by Scott. Forei-
          man and CompanY. Glenview. Illinoil. in 1968. 
            Manufactured in the United States of Arneriea 
            Dowr Publieationa. Im: •• 31 East 2nd Street.  Mineola, N. Y. 11601 
          U.......,  ~ Conlftll  Catalo~ng-ln-Publlcatlon Data 
          Rc.ealieht. Maxwen. 
            Introckaetion to analysis. 
            ReprInt. Originally  published:  Glenview. In.  : Scott. Foresman. 
          and Co., l888. 
            BIbJioIraphy: p. 
            lneladea index. 
            I.  Mathematical analysis.    I.  Title. 
          QAaOO.R63  1986        516                      86-25300 
          ISBN 0-488-6&038-3 (pbk.) 
    Preface 
       This  text  is the  outgrowth  of a course given at Berkeley since 1960. 
    The object is to redo calculus correctly in a setting of sufficient generality 
    to provide a reasonable foundation for advanced work in various branches 
    of analysis. The emphasis is on abstraction,  concreteness, and simplicity. 
    A few abstract  ideas  u.re  introduced,  almost  minimal  in  number.  Such 
    important  concepts as metric space, compactness, and uniform convergence 
    are discussed in such a manner that they  will not need to be redone later. 
    They  are given concrete  illustration  and  their  worth  is demoIlstrated  by 
    using them  to prove the  results of calculus, generalized in ways that  are 
    obviously meaningful and practical. 
       The background recommended is any first course in calculus, through 
     partial differentiation and multiple integrals (although, as a matter  of fact, 
    nothing  is a88umed except for the  axioms of the  real number  system).  A 
     person completing most of the material in this book should not only have 
     a respectable compreheD8ion of basic real analysis but should also be ready 
     to  take  serious COUl'8ell  in  such  subjects  as  integration  theory,  complex 
     variable,  differential  equatioD8, other  topics  in  analysis,  and  general 
     topology. Experience indicates that  this  material  is acC688ible to  a wide 
     range of students,  including many with primary  interests  outside mathe-
     matics,  provided there  is a stre88 on the easier problems. 
       The quest for simplicity has resulted  in the elimination  of a host of 
     mathematical  synonyms  and  the  omi88ion or relegation  to  the  problem 
     sets of a number of important  ideas. Some problems, easily recognizable, 
     &88ume a familiarity  with  linear  algebra  that  was considered unwise to 
     presume of all students.  Indeed only a few simple facts on determinant. 
     are needed for the  chapters  on multivariable  calculus, but  things  are Il1O 
     arranged that the instructor who wishes to avail himself of the conveniencee 
     of linear algebra may easily do 80 with no break in continuity.  Differential 
     forms were excluded, regrettably,  to avoid exorbitant  algebraic detours. 
       This  text  can be used for courses ranging in length  from one to t.wo 
     quarters.  The original semester course at Berkeley coveled the first eight 
     chapters, with the omission of most of the third section of the eiPth chapter. 
     At  present  Berkeley  has  a  two-quarter  sequence with  the  first  quarter, 
     IIIOmewhat sped up, covering the first six chapters and parts of the seventh. 
       Here are 80me comments on the individual chapters. Chapter I, which 
     discusses material on basic set theory thu.t is familiar to many students, can 
     be covered very rapidly.  Chapter  II gives a brief account of how all the 
     properties  of the  real  numbers  can  be deduced from a few axioms. This 
         material  can all10 be covered  rapidly.  It should not be bypassed,  however, 
         for contrary  to a widespread faith  in modern pedagogy, my experience has 
         been that  time  spent  here  is not  wasted.  Chapters  III  and  IV, on metric 
         spaces and continuous  functions,  are the meat  of the book. They  must be 
         done  with  great  care.  After  this,  Chapters  V,  VI,  and  VII  flow along 
         smoothly,  for  their  substance  (elementary  calculus)  is familiar  and  the 
         proofs now make sense. Chapter  VIII,  which is about  existence theorems, 
         is of a slightly  greater  order of difficulty. One may save some time by going 
         very  lightly  over  the  implicit  function  theorem  if it is intended  to do the 
         general case later,  in the following chapter.  The last section of  the chapter 
         treats  ordinary  differential  equations,  and  the  classroom  discussion  of 
         these  may with  relative  impunity  be restricted  to the very  first theorem. 
         Chapters  IX and X, on multivariable  calculus,  conclude the  book. They 
         should  cause  no  difficulty  for  anyone  who  has  come  this  far.  However, 
         omitting  them entirely  would be preferable to an attempt  to rush through. 
              It is impossible to write a text such as this without  an obvious indebted-
         ness to J. Dieudonn6's classic Poundationa oj M adem Anal".,.  My gratitude 
         is also due  my colleagues of the  curricular  reform  committee  at Berkeley 
         which instituted  the new Mathematics  104 course, to Mrs. Sandra Cleveland 
         for writing  up my original lectures,  to Adam Koranyi,  whose revised notes 
          have  long  been  in use,  for  many  conversations,  to  numerous  other  col-
          leagues  and  students  for their  comments,  to my  family  for  its  patience, 
          and to Scott,  Foresman and Company  for its affable efficiency. 
          Berkeley,  California                                     Maxwell Rosenlicht 
          Contents 
             CHAPTER I. NOTIONS FROM SET THEORY                                                       I 
                               II.   Sets and elements. Subsets                                       J 
                               12.   Operations on Beta                                               40 
                               13.  Functions                                                         • 
                               14.  Finite and infinite sets                                         10 
                                     Problema                                                        11 
            CHAPTER II.  TIlE  REAL NUMBER SYSTDI                                                    II 
                               11.  The fteJd propertiea                                             16 
                               12.   Order                                                           19 
                               13.  The Ieut upper bound property                                    • 
                               • 4.  The exilltence of square roots                                  18 
                                     Pro~~                                                           • 
           CHAPTER III.  METRIC  SPACES                                                              as 
                               11.  Definition of metric apace. Examples                             It 
                               12.  Open and closed seta                                             11 
                               13.  Converpnt  aequencea                                             " 
                           ..  14.  CompJetenelll                                                    11 
                               • 5.  Compactnell                                                     " 
                               16.  Connectednell                                                    It 
                                     Problema                                                        6J. 
            CIIAPTER  IV. CONTINUOUS Ft1NCTIONS                                                      " 
                               11.  Definition of continuity. Examp1et                               .. 
                               12.  Continuity  and limits                                           71 
                               13.  The continuity of rational  operationl.  PuacIioDI 
                                      with valuea in •                                               'II 
                               14.  CoDtinUOUI functions on a compact met.ric ....                   .,. 
                               15.  CoDtinuoua functions on a 00DIleCted ..........                  • 
                               16.  8equeneea of functions                                           • 
                                      Problems                                                       .. 
             CHAPTER V. DIFFEIIENTJATION                                                           '  " 
                                11.  The defiDitiOD of derivative                                    • 
                                12.  Ru1et of dilerentiation                                        _ 
                                ta.  The,IIlMIl value &Iaeore                                       _ 
                                14.  TayIor'.  ~                                                    .. 
                                      Problema                                                      1. 
           CIUPTER  VI. RIEMANN INTEGRATION                                                     111 
                              II.   Definitiou  and examples                                    111 
                              12.  Linearity and order properties of the integral               116 
                              13.  Existence of the integral                                    118 
                              14.  The fundamental theorem of ealcuIua                          lIS 
                              15.  The logarithmic and exponential functions                     III 
                                    Problems                                                     131 
          aIAPI'EIl  VII.  INTERCHANGE OF UMIT  OPERATIONS                                       117 
                              II.   Integration  and ditterentiation  of aequences 
                                    of functions                                                 lSI 
                              12.  Infinite aeries                                               1'1 
                              13.  Power I8ries                                                  ISO 
                              14.  The tripnometric  functioaa                                   156 
                              16.  OOfereatiation under the intecral lip                         119 
                                    ~                                                            1~ 
         CILU'TBR  VID. TIlE MBTIIOD OF StJa:ESS1VE  APPROXIMATIONS  169 
                              11.  The fixed point theorem                                       170 
                              U.  TIle aim.pleat cue of the implicit function  theorem           I71 
                              I a.  Exiet.ence and UIliquena  tbeoremI for ordinary 
                                    dilerential  equatioIIB                                      177 
                                    Problema                                                     190 
           CIIAPI'BR IX. PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIATION                                                19S 
                              11.  DefiDitiona and bailie propertiee                             1M 
                              12.  JDcher derivatives                                            .1 
                              13.  The implieit function theonm                                  _ 
                                    Problema                                                     IU 
            CILU'TBR  X. MULTIPLE INTEGRALS                                                      III 
                              11.  BiImun intep.tion  OD ..... interval in ... 
                                     _plea and bailie propertiea                                 116 
                               ,2.  ErIeteece of the in"",.  lD .... tion  OD 
                                     arbitrary  .. baeta of ... Volume                           III 
                               13.  Iterated intepaJa                                            .1 
                               ,f.  0IIup of variable                                            ISS 
                                     Problema                                                    Mt 
          8VCGBITION8  lOR FURTHER  RUDING                                                       U9 
          INDEX                                                                                  lSI 
  Introduction to Analysis 
     CHAPTER  1 
     Notions from' Set Theory 
                  Bet theory  is the languap  of mMhematicl. Tbe 
                mOlt  complicated  ideas  in  modern mathematies are 
                developed in terma of the basic nodo.  of let theory • 
               . Fortunately  the grammar.and vocabuluy  of ... theory 
                are extremely simple, at least in the .... that it. poe-
                aible to 10 very  far in mathematiClil with 001,. a ema11 
                amount of set theory.  It so happens that the subject 01 
                let  theory  not  only  underlies mathernatiee  but  baa 
                become itlelf an extensive braneh of atudy;  however we 
                do not enter deeply into  this Itudy  beeauae there it DO 
                need  to. All we mUlt do here it familiarise ouneIv. 
                with some of the baaie ideas 10 that the lan&uace ...., be 
                11Ied with precision. A fint  readilll  of tbiI chapter can 
                be very rapid ainee it i. mainly a matter of pttinc WIld 
                to a few worda. There i. oocuional verboeity t directed 
                toward  the  clarification  of certain  simple ideas  which 
                are really somewhat  more subtle  than they &ppeU'. 
              I      I.  NOTIONS  no .. IIIIT THlIOaT 
                                                                            fl.  SETS AND ELEMENTS. SUBSETS. 
                      We do not attempt  to define the word.,.  Intuitively  a set is a collec-
              tion, or ",gregale,  or famil'll, or en.semble (all of which words are used synony-
              mously with set) of objects which are called the elementa, or member. of the 
              set, and the set is completely determined  by the knowledge of which objects 
              are elements of it. We may speak, for  example, of the set of students  at a 
               certain. univenity;  the elements of thie set are the individual students  there. 
              Similarly we may lpeak  of the set of all real numbel'l  (to be diacuased in 
              eome detail  in the  next chapter),  or the set of aliitraight  lines in a given 
               plane, etc. It Ihould be noted that the elements of a set may themselves be 
               sets; for example each element of the set of allitraight  lines in a given plane 
               ia a set of points, and we may alao consider such 1881 mathematical  examples 
               .. the set of married couples in a given town, or the set of regiments in an 
               army. 
                       We ehalI generally  use capital  lettel'l  to denote  sets  and  lower-cue 
               letters to denote their  elementa. The Iymbol  E  is used to denote  member-
               ehip in a set, 10 that 
                                                                            zES 
               means that z is an element of the set S. The ltatement  "z ia not an element 
               of S" is abbreviated 
                                                                            zf!S. 
               Inatead  of  writing  a E  S,  b E S,  c E  S  (the  commu  having  the  arne 
                meaning .. "and")  we often write a, b, c E s. 
                        The atatement  that a set is completely determined  by ita elements may 
                be written  .. followa: If X and  Yare sets then  X  .. Y if and only if, for 
                all z, z E  X if and only if z E Y. Equality  here and elsewhere in thia book 
                (denoted by -) means identity;  X and  Y happen to be different Iymbola, 
                but they may very well be different names for the same set, in which case 
                the equation  X - Y means that the sets indicated  by the symbols X aad 
                Y are  the same.  X" Y of COUJ'le means that  the  sets  indicated  by  the 
                aymbola X and  Y are not the same. 
                        ThUi we imagine oUJ'lelves in a world peopled by certain  "objects" 
                (certain  of which are  called "sets"),  and  for some pail'l  of objects  z,  X, 
                wh .. X is a set, we write:e E  X, the symbol  E  having the property  that 
                lwo ... X and Y are equal if and only if for each object z we have z E  X 
                if and only if :Ie E  Y. The symbol E  mUit alao bave other properties  (which 
                we dan't specify here) that enable UB, given certain sets, to construct  otheJ'l. 
                The important tbina is tbat everything which followa is expreBlible in terms 
                01 the fundamental  relation  z E  X. 
                                                               tl._AllD  .........       II 
              Seta are IOmetinuw iDdieated by Iiaciq  III their members between 
         br&cell. For example, the _ 
                                           IJaoe, Jim} 
         baa Jane and .nm .. ita memben, 
                                           (1, 2,3,  ••. ) 
         (with the three dote I'e8d Uaod 10 on")  ie the _  of poeitive inteprB. and 
                                                f-t  . 
         ia the _   having one element. the object  named _. (Note that  f G J ie not 
         the aame .... In the aame way theN ia a ditferenee between a university 
         cluB coDIIiatiDg of one atudent aod the atudent hilDll8lf, or between a com-
         mittee 00DIIiat.i1ll of one peraon and that peraon.) The above notation how-
         ever is not always feuible.  A more frequendy  used notation is 
                                  Iz : (statement involving s)J, 
         which meaoa the aet of all z for which the statement  involving z ia true. 
         Thus 
                                   (s : z ie a poeitive integerJ 
         ia the aet of positive intepra,  and for any aet 8 we have 
                                         8 - fz: zE8). 
         For any aet 8, the aymboI 
                                fs E 8 : (atatement  involviDg z») 
         deDotea the -.me set .. 
                            (z : :i E 8 and (statement involving z) J , 
          which ia the let of all elements of 8 for which the atatement ia true. Thus 
          if R is the .. of real numbers, 
                                   Iz E R : :r:I- l' - (1,  -I). 
               If X and  Y are aeta and every element of X is al80 an element of Y. 
          we a.y that X is a ...., of Y; this is written 
                                       XC Y,  or  Y:JX. 
          Thus  XC Y ie ahorthand  for  the  atatement  "if  z E  X  then  s E  Y". 
          X - Y is equivalent to the two atatements X C  Y and Y C X. If X C  Y 
          aod Y C Z then clearly  X C z; the two &nst atatements are IOmetimea 
          written more aucoinotly                                            . 
                                            XcYCZ. 
                   ,         I.  NO'l'IONa  noll 811T TRIIORT 
                   For auy object  z  and  set  X  the  relation  z E  X  can  now be  written  in 
                    another  (1_ convenient I) way, namely  (zl  eX. The negation of X C Y 
                   •  written                                                          Xtl, Y  or  Y~X. 
                    X. called a JWOPII' eubuI 0/ Y if XC Y but X,. Y. 
                               The em", .., •  the set with no elements. It is denoted by the symbol 
                    91. A IOUI'Ce of confusion to beKinnel'l •  that although  t.he empty let oon-
                    taint  noCIam"  it i .... f is lOfMIAing (namely lOme particular  let,  the  one 
                    characterised by the fact. that. nothing is in it.). The set. (911 •  a let. con-
                    tainilll exactly one element, namely the empty set. (In a similar way, when 
                    dea1in1 
                                         with numbers, lay wit.h ordinary  intepl'l,  we mUit. be careful not 
                     to reprd  the number aero 81 nothing: 181'0 is something, a part.icular num-
                     ber, which repreeents the number of thinp in "nothing".  Thus 181'0 and 91 
                     are quite different, but there is a connection between them in that  the set 
                     91 hu IeIO elements.) Note that  for any set X we have 
                                                                                     III C X  and  XC X. 
                     A epecial cue of both of these statements  is the statement 
                                                                                                        III C Ill, 
                     which occuiont  diJlloulty iI, u  is often  improperly  done,  one ......  'Ije 
                     oontailled in" for both of the symbole C  and  E. The statement  III C III 
                     ia tNe becalMe the statement  "for each z E III we have z E Ill" is obviouely 
                     true,  and  allO  because it is "vacuously  true",  that  is there  is DO z E III 
                     for which the statement  must be verified, just. u  the statement  "all  pip 
                     with winp apeak Chineee" is vacuously true. 
                                                                                                                                      I Z.  OPERATIONS ON SETS. 
                                  If X and Yare aete, the inter.edion 0/ X and Y, denoted by X ("\ Y, is 
                      defined to be the set of all objects which are both  elements of X and ele-
                      ments of Y. In eymbole, 
                                                                     X ("\ Y ....  (z : z E X  and  z E YI. 
                                  The union oJ X and Y, denoted XU Y, is the Bet of all objects which 
                      are elements of at leut one of the Bets X and  Y. That i8. XU Y is the set 
                      of all objects which are either elemente of X or elements of Y (or of both), 
                      ineymboll 
                                                                       XUY- (z:zEX  or  zEYJ. 
                       The word "or"  is ueed here in the manner that is standard  in mathematica. 
                       In ordinary  language  the word "or"  is often exclusive, that is, if A and B 
                       are statements,  then  II A  or B" is underetood  to mean  "A or B  but  not 
                       both",  whereu in mathematice it altDtJlI' meane" A or B, or both A and B". 
                                                                                   ,2.  0 ....... 0 ... 011 .....    I 
                  If X ia a aubaet of a .. 8, then the ~ oJ X .. 8 ia the .. 01 
           all e1ementa of 8 which ..... not elementa of X. If it ia expIieltly Itated, or 
           clear from the context, euctly  what the set 8 is. we often omit the wordI 
           "in 8"  and 11M the notation ex for the complement of X. TbU is 
                                                ex - fsEB: sf! XI. 
                  Th .. operations ..... illustrated in Fipre 1, where the leta in queetioD 
           are seta of pointa in plane repone bounded by curves. 
                           xny                                  XUy                                     ex 
                                    FrOUD 1. Intenect.ion, union, and oompIemenL 
                   For another example, let 8 be the set of real numbenl, aDd let 
                             X  -    (s E 8: s ~ 11,  Y - (s E 8: 0 ~ s S 11. 
            (The symbols  ~ and S will be defined later.) Then 
                                              X/,,\Y- III 
                                              XVY- (sE8:s~OI 
                                                   eX-lzE8:s<-1I. 
                   Certain relationa hold among the symbols  A, V, e. For example, if 
            X and Yare aubeeta of & set 8, then 
                                                 eX A eY - e(X V V). 
            This is illustrated in Figure 2. A proof of tbia fonnula ia civen below. 
                  FJOUIIII  2.  eX ilshaded  1111, eY ilshaded  = , e(X v  Y) illhadecl HH. 
                                            iDuIf.ratIIIr ex f'\ eY - e(X v  y). 
                  •       ••  NOTIONS  nIOll  SlIT TllIIOBY 
                 ExncIsB.  Prove that if xes, Yes, then eX ("\ e Y =  e(x v  Y). 
                  It mlllt  he ahown that  the two seta have the _me elementa, in other worda that  each 
                  element  of the set on the left ill an element of the set on the ript and vice vera. 
                          If z E  ex f"I eY,  then  z E  eX  and  z E  eY.  Tbia  means  that  z E 8,  z e: X, 
                  z E Y. Since z e: X, z e: Y, we know that. z e:X V  Y. Hence z E e(X V  Y). 
                          Conversely, if  z E e(X V  Y),  then  z E 8  and  z e: X V  Y.  Therefore  z e: X 
                  and z e: Y. ThIl8 z E eX and z E  eY, 10 that  z E  eX f"I eY. Thill completee  the 
                  proal. 
                            If X  and  Y  are  seta,  the  notation  X -                                                     Y  is  BOmetimes used  for 
                   (s EX: x f1. YI.  Thus  if  X  and  Y  are  8Ubseta of  BOme set  S,  then 
                  X - Y - X("\eY. 
                            Two seta are said to be diajoinl  if they  have  no element  in common. 
                  That is, X and  Y are disjoint  if X ("\ Y = flJ. A collection of any  number 
                  of. leta is aid to be disjoint  if every  two of the sets are disjoint. 
                      .      The intersection  and  union  of more than  two seta may be defined in 
                   an obvious manner.  For example, if X, Y, Z ar.e seta then 
                                          X ("\ Y ("\ Z -                   Ix : % E X, x E Y,  x E ZI, 
                   and 
                                          XVYVZ- (x:sEX  or  xEY  or  xEZI. 
                   Clearly  X ("\ Y ("\ Z ... (X ("\ Y) ("\ Z ==  X ("\ (Y ("\ Z),  and  similarly  for 
                   the  union  of  three  seta.  More  generally  the  intersection  and  union  of 
                   arbitrary  families of seta may be defined, and in an obvious way. The only 
                   problem  is finding an  adequate  notation  for an arbitrary  family  of seta, 
                   and tbia is done .. folloW1l. Let 1 be any set and  for each i E 1 let Xi be 
                   another  set  (80 that  we may .peak of 1 as being an induing  /4miI7l, whoee 
                   elementa are irtdit:u used to specify the seta at which we direct  our main 
                   attention).  The set of all seta Xi" i ranges over 1 is denoted 
                                                                         (X, : i Ell  or  (X,I., 
                    and  the  interaedion and  union of tbia  family  of seta,  together  with  their 
                    respective  conventional  symbols, are defined by 
                                                    ("\ X, - (x: for each i E 1, x E X,I, 
                                                    .• , 
                                                    V Xi'"  (x : for at least one i E  I, z E X.I. 
                                                    ie, 
                    EXBRCIBB.  Prove  that  if  1  and  S  are  seta  and  if  for  each  i E 1  we 
                    have X, C S, then e«("\ X,)  - V  (eX,). 
                                                                    iEl                    iE' 
                    It. __ he Ibowa t.ba\ eacb element  of the let OD the left ill an element  of the let on the 
                    .................. 
                                                                           • 2.  OP:lJU.TlOJlB  ON UTI     7 
                H z E e( "X,) then  z E 8 and z E "X,. Therefore z E X"  fOl' at least one 
                           fEI                              .EI 
          ;  E  1. Thus z E  eX" 10 that z E  U (ex,). 
                                                  IEr 
                Converaely, if z E  U (eX.),  then fOl' lOme;  E 1 we have z E  ex" Thus z E 8 
                                     'el 
           and z E X,. Since z E X, we have z E "  X,. Therefore z E e(" X,). This comp\eta 
                                                       lei                        lei 
           the proof. 
                 If G and  b are objects,  by  the  ordered ptJir (G, b)  we mean the  two 
           objects G and b in a definite order, G first, b second. Thus  if G,  b, e, d are 
           objects then (G, b) == (e, d) if and only if G = e and b - d. Note the distinc-
           tion between (G, b) and (G, bl i the latter is a set with two elements (unlefl8, 
           of COU1'8e, G happens to equal li, in which case (G, b J - (a I, a set with one 
           element), and  la, hI can equally well be written  (b, aI, spoiling the order. 
           We remark that  instead  of introducing  the  new concept "ordered  pair" 
           into set theory,  we can actually  define the ordered pair (a, b) in terms of 
           the  primitive  notions about  sets  that  we already  have:  we set  (a, b) ... 
           I(al, (G, bll. This  definition  does precisely what  we want:  to  any  two 
           objects a, b (distinct or not) it auigns  an object (a, b), and it does this in 
           such a faeruon that  (a, b) - (e, d) if and only if a ... e and b =- d. 
                 Given two sets X and  Y we define the cartuian  prod4ld (or prodtACl) 
           oj X and Y, denoted  X X Y, to be the set of all ordered pairs the  fint 
           member of which is in X, the second in Y, that is 
                                     X X Y = (x, y)  : x E X, y E YI. 
                 Ordinary rectangular coordinates in the plane give the uaual pictorial 
            representation  of the cartesian product:  the whole plane can be identified 
           with the product of the two coordinate axes. In Figure 3 there is a niore 
           complicated picture in which X, Y are subsets of the two coordinate axes 
           and the cartesian product is a ~baet of the first quadrant. 
                                                      •     • 
                                                      I I 
                                             FioUBII 3.  Cartesian  product. 
          8     I.  NOTIONS  FROM  SilT  THEORY 
                                                                                      13.  FUNCI'IONS. 
                If X and  Yare sets, by a function from X to Y  (or a Junction Jrom X 
          into Y, or a function on X with value8 in Y) is meant a rule which associates 
          with each element of X a definite element of Y.  (The word mapping, or 
           map, is often used instead of function.) The "rule"  can he given in many 
           ways, some of which are discussed below, but  the essential thing is that 
           given any element of X there is associated, somehow, some definite element 
           of Y. Two functions from X to Y are considered equal if and only if both 
           functions associate with each specific element of X the same element of Y. 
                 Functions are usually denoted by small letters,  such as J. The state-
           ment "J is a function from X to  Y" is often written 
                                                     J:X-Y. 
           For any a: E  X, the element of Y that the function J associates with z (the 
           value 01 J at :r)  is  denoted I(a:). Thus  if J:  X -              Y  and  g: X -       Y  then 
           1-g if and only if I(z)  - g(a:) for all a: E  X. W~ say that J smds a: into 
           I(z),  or that I map8 a: into I (a:) , or that :r and I(z)  correspond under J. 
                 The rule defining a given function I: X -                Y may be given in various 
           ways. One way, which is usually not very practir.al, is to list all the elements 
           of X, listing with each one the corresponding one of Y. Or the rule may be 
           given by a mathematical formula. For example, if X and Y are both taken 
           to be the set H of real numbers, an equation like 
                                                fez) = Zl + 3z - 2 
           defines a  real-valued function J on H i in such a  case one often  speaks 
            (imprecisely I) of the  function :r' + ax - 2. Again, if X is a subset of H, 
           a real-valued function on X may be given geometrically by its graph, that 
            is the set of points I (a:, I(z»  : z E  XI in the plane; note that this method 
            mayor may not be practical, depending on what f is like, for it may not be 
            possible to "draw"  the Rl'aph. In  fact  any subset  of the  plane defines a 
            real-valued function on a subset of the real numbers, provided that  any 
            vertical  line (z - constant)  intersects the  lubset  of the  plane in at most 
            one point. Finally we remark that  the "rule"  defining a function need not 
            be practically  computable. For example, for z any  real number, let I(a:) 
            denote that integer 0, 1, ... , 9 which is in the billionth decimal place of :r 
            (to  be precile, since a  real number a:  may have  more than  one decimal 
            representation,  88 in 1.0000 ...  = .9999 ... , we might better  take J(a:) to 
            he the smallest possible integer in the  billionth decimal place of :r);  this 
            rule gives an honest-to-goodness function I: H -                 H, but who would hazard 
            a guess 88 to the value of 1(11'), or even 1(...;7J.)1 
                  Though this is in no way essential for what follows, we remark that 
            it is easy to define the notion of function in terms of more primitive concepts 
            of set theory, 88 follows: If X and Yare sets, a function from X into Y is a 
            subset of X X Y with the property  that  for any x E  X there is one and 
                                                                               13.  ruNCftONI    9 
         only one 1/ E  Y such that  (z, 1/) is in the subset.  If the function  is denoted 
         J: X -    Y then the unique 1/ referred to above is, of COUl'lle, J(:e). In analOl)' 
         with  the  case of  real-valued  functiona' on  the  real  numbers,  this  lubeet 
          I (z, J(z»  : z E  X I of X X Y is called the graph of the function,  10 that 
          we are again saying that the graph detennines  the function. 
                                                             1 
               FrOUD 4. Graph of the function I: R -+ R liven  by I(~) - Zl far aU s E •. 
                It is useful to note  that  the word  "function"  alone can be defined in 
          primitive  terms,  not  only  the  more  complete  concept  "function  flOm X 
          into  Y": a function  is an ordered  pair  whose first  member  ill an ordered 
          pair  of sets, say  (X, V),  and  whose second  member  is a  function  flOm 
          X into  Y. That is, a function  is IOmething of the type  «X, y),  (a certain 
          kind of subset  of X  X y». This  emphasizes that  the I8tI X and  Y are to 
          be conaidered &8 easential parts of the function J:X -              Y. For many  pur-
          poI8I  it is important  to bear  this  fact  in mind,  but molt  often  we do not 
          make any explicit mental note of it. For example, if I: X -             Y is a fUllCUon 
          and  Y is a subset  of another  set  Y',  then  we set a function I': X -          Y' by 
          setting  J'(z)  - J(z)  for all :e E  X,  that  is, living  I' the same  II'&Ph "I, 
          which  il  pouible  since  X  X Y C  X  X V'.  Although  I  and I' &1'8  really 
           different  functions,  we  uaually  denote  them  by  the  same  Iymbol,  even 
           writing  down the technically  incorrect  expl'ellion J: X -          V'.  In the same 
           way, liven  any function I: X -        Yand any subset  X" of X, we can de&ne 
           a  function  1": X" -      Y by I"(z)  -/(z)  for all z E  X"; I" is called the 
           rearictioR  011 to X". Of course, I" is not  the same &8 I, though we olten 
           denote  them  by the same .ymhol,  for example by writing  the technically 
           incorrect  expl'ellion J: X" -      Y when there is no danger of confUlion, The 
           graph of the latter  function is of COUl'lle a subeet of the graph of the oriPnai 
           function!:  X -     Y, since X" X Y C X X Y. 
                If !: X -    Y and,:  Y - Z are functiona,  one can define the ctnrapoft-
           lion 01 J and"  or compoaedJunctioR, a function flOm X into Z, by &8IOCiating 
           to each element of X an element of Z in the obvious way: given an element 
           of 
              X, one fint uses J to get an element of Y, then one U8eI ,  to get flOm this 
         10    I.  NOTlON8  FROM  8ET THEORY 
         last  element an element of Z. The composed function is usually denoted 
         go 1,80 that  we have 
                                            go/:  X-Z, 
         with (g 0  I) (x)  =  g(J(x»  for each x E  X. 
              A function I: X -      Y  is called one-to-one, or one-one, if different ele-
         mente of X correspond under I to different elements of Y, that is if l(xl)  -
         I(~oi) only if ~l - 2: ••  A function I: X -  Y is called onto if each element of 
         Y corresponds under 1 to .orne element of X, that is if each y E  Y is of the 
         form 11 -/(x),  for lOme x E X.  If /: X -         Y is both  one-one and  onto 
         it is called one-one onto, or a one-one correapoodence between X and Y. An 
         example of a function that  is one-one onto is, for any set  X, the identity 
         lunction ix:  X -X, given by ix(x)  =  2:  for all x E  X.  (Note  that  what 
         goes under  the  name "the function x"  in elementary  calculus is actually 
         the identity  function on the set of real numbers.) If I: X -         Y  is one-one 
         onto then each element of Y corresponds under I to one and only one ele-
         ment of 
                   X, 80 we can define a function I-I:  Y -    X by!-I(y)  =  2: if y =  I (x). 
         !-I  it called  the  ,,,,,erae Junction oj J,  and  is 0.180 one-one onto.  Clearly 
         (Jl)-I  .. J, and!-I  0 I =  ix, lol""l = iy. 
               If J: X -  Y is a function and X' C X, then the subset of Y given by 
                                     J(X/ =  1/(2:) : 2: E X'} 
                                           ) 
          (where the last symbol is shorthand  for Iy : there exists x E  X' such that 
          y - I(x)!)  is called the 'mtJ{/e 01 X' under I,  or simply the imtJ{/e 01 X', if 
          there is no danger of confusion. The two UBeI we have made for the symbol 
         1 ( ) are  related  by  the  equation 
                                I«~J) - II(~)J for each 2: E  X. 
               If I: X -   Y is a function and  Y' C Y, then the subset of X given by 
                                  I-I(Y,)  -  Ix EX: I(x) E yl} 
          is called the ,,,,,erae imOfe 01 Y' under I. It consists of those elemente of X 
          which correspond under I to elements of Y'.  If I: X -          Y  happens to  be 
          one-one onto we have another use for the symbol I-I,  namely the inverse 
          function!-I:  Y -   X. These two uses of I-I must be carefully distinguished, 
          though confusion rarely arises. If I: X -      Y  is Olle-Olle onto  then  the two 
          uses of !-I are related by  fJ-l(y)!  -= I-I({y\)  for e&<~h y E  Y. 
                                                     ,4.  FINITE  AND INFINITE  SETS. 
               We are familiar with the  set of positive integers, or natural numbJa 
          11, 2, 3, •.. }. This set, together with the various ideas associated with it, 
          INCh as ite ordering (the fact that  its elements can be written  down in a 
          de8Dlte order), or wch as the fact that  two of ita elements may be added 
                                                                             14.  I'lNITII  AND INI'lNITII  IIIITII    11 
            to obtain  a third  with certain  general rules holding for this  addition,  can 
            be obtained  from the primitive  principles of set theory. In this text we shall 
            instead  &8Bume the  buic  properties  of the  real number  system  and  from 
            those  derive all the  properties  of the set  11,2,3,  ... 1. In this section  we 
            Bhall for convenience 8BBume a few simple facts about  the natural  numbe ... 
            in order  to get u  quickly  u  possible to certain  other  eBBy matte...  of set 
            theory.  However  all the  facts  about  the  set of natural  numbe ... that  are 
            uaed here will be proved explicitly in the next chapter.  The notions devel-
            oped in this section will not be applied until later, so no circular reuoning 
            OCCUl'l. 
               Let us therefore  &8Bume knowledge of the set  11,2,3,  ... 1. A set  X is 
            called finite  if it is empty  or there  is a positive integer  n such that  X can 
            be  put  into  one-one  correspondence  with  the  set  11,2 •... , nl,  that  is 
            there  is a one-one function  from  /1,2 •...• nlonto  X. Thus a set is finite 
            if we can count its elements and run out of elements after we count a certain 
            number, say n, of them. The number n depends only on the set X, not on 
            the  order  in  which its elements  are counted  off j n is called the number 0/ 
            elementB in X. For oompleteness we say that the number of elements in the 
            empty set is zero. Any subset of a finite set is itBelf finite, and if it is a proper 
            subset  it hu a smaller number of elements. 
                   A set  is infinite  if it  is  not  finite.  This  means  that  we can  pick  an 
             element ZI EX. then an element ZI from the complement of I ZI),  then an 
             element z. from the complement  of IZI. ZI).  etc .• and  we never run out of 
             elements  of X. Thus there  exist distinct  elements SI, Sa. S •••••  in X. 
                    It is eBBy to show that a set X is infinite if and only if it may be put 
             into one-one correspondence with a proper subset of itself. To do this, note 
             first that if X  is finite then  any proper subset hu a smaller number of ele-
             ments.  whereas two finite sets in one-one correspondence  must  have  the 
             same  number  of elements.  This proves  the  "if"  part.  On the other  hand, 
             if  X  is infinite  then  there  exist  distinct  elements  ZI, ZI. Sa ••••  in  X.  The 
             complement of IZI. ZI, ZI,  ••• 1 in X is a subset  Y. so that 
                          X = IZI. ZI. ZI,  ••• 1 U  Y  and  IZI. Sa. Z"  ••• 1 r'\ Y =  flJ. 
             A one-one correspondence between X and its proper subset  I ZI. ZI,  ••• 1 U  Y 
             is given by the function  which sends each z. into Z.+l and each element of 
              Y into itself. This proves the "only  if" part.  completing the proof. 
                    The set of natural  numben  can be used to give an eBBy definition of 
             the notion of sequence. A 8equence 0/ n element8 in a 8et X, or an n-'up16 0/ 
             elementB 0/ X. may be defined to be a function  from  11, 2. : ..• n 1 into  Xi 
              ifthefunctionisdenoted/andwewrite/(l)                             = zl,/(2)  - Sa, •• •• /(n)  - z., 
              then  the  n-tuple  is often  written  (ZI, ZI •••• , z.).  An  infinite  8equmc:e 0/ 
              elements 0/ X  (or a 86qumc:6  0/ elements  0/ X, if  there  isn't  any  danger  of 
              confusion with  finite sequences)  is a  function  from the set of all natural 
              numben  into  Xi  u  above  this  can  be  written  (ZI. Sa. ZI •••• ).  or.  more 
              conventionally.  ZI. Sa, ZI •••• ,  or  sometimes  Iz"I_.I •••.•.• 
            11  I.  JIIOI'rONlI  I'BOII  IIIIT TRIIORT 
           PROBLEMS 
             1.  Let R be the eat or real numbera and let the symbols <, :S have their CODV8Il-
                  tlonal JllMlMp 
                  (a)  Show that 
                    .   Iz e R : 0 :S z :S 31 "  I z e R : -1 < z < 11 - Iz e R : 0 :S z < 11.' 
                  (b)  Lilt the elementll or 
                        (11,3, 'I V (~E R : zI- 4z + 3 - OJ) ,,(z E R : -1 :S. < 31. 
                  (0)  Show that 
                         <t. E R : -I:S z:S 01 V (z e R : I <. < '\)" I~ e R: O:S.:S  3) 
                                               -   (s E R : I < z:S 81 VIOl. 
              2.  U A is a aubeet or the eat 8, ehow that 
                  (a)  e(eA)  - A 
                  (b)  A V A - A "A - A V flJ - A 
                  (0)  A "flJ - flJ 
                  (d)  A X flJ - flJ. 
              a.  Let A, B, 0 be IIlbeetll or a eat 8. Prove the foUowinl etatementll and illustrate 
                  them with diatrama. 
                  <a)  eA V  eB - e(A "B) 
                  (b)  A n(BVO)  - (A "B) V(A "0) 
                  (c)  A V (B "0) - (A VB)" (.4. V 0). 
              '- U A, B, 0 are I8te, show that 
                  (a)  (A - B) ,,0 - (A "0) - B 
                  (b)  (A VB) - (A "B) - (A - B) V (B - A) 
                  (c)  A - (B - 0) - (A :.. B) V (A "B "0) 
                  (d)  (A - B) X 0 - (A X 0) - (B X 0). 
              5.  Let 1 be a nonempty eat and for each i  e 1 let Xc be a set. Prove that 
                   (a)  for any eat B we have                                                               . 
                                                  B" V XI - V (B "X.) 
                                                         'er         'er 
                   (b)  if each X. is a aubeet or a given eat 8, then 
                                                      e( V  XI) - " eX,. 
                                                          feller 
              6 ..  Prove that if f: X .... Y, ,: Y .... Z, and 1a: z .... W are functions, then 
                                                 "  •  CtJ  • n - (Ia • ,> ·f· 
              7.  Letf:X .... Y be a function, let A and B be IIlbeetll or X, and let 0 and D be 
                   .. baete or Y. Prove that 
                   (a>  I(A VB) -/(A)  V/(B) 
                   (b)  I(A "B) C/(A) "/(B) 
                   (0)  t-I(O V D) - 1-'(0)  V t-I(D) 
                   (d)  1-'(0" D> - r(O) "t-I(D) 
                   (e)  ,-a(f(A»:> A 
                   (f)  /(f't(0»  c O. 
                                                                .......    u 
                                                                       . 
        8.  Under the ..umpticma  of Problem 7, prove that I II oae-oae If ud CJD1)o If the 
           lip :> in (e) CUI be repIaoed by - for all A C X, aDd I II onto If ud ..., If 
           the tip C ill (f) ... be replaced by - for all C C r. 
        I.  How IIIaDT aubeete are there of the eat (1,2, a, ... , til' How IIIADJ .... of 
           tbia eat into itlelf'  How muymapl  of &hie .. onto illelft 
       10.  (a)  How muy IUDOtioDII are there flOlll a IlOIlfIIIlpty .. B iDto 111' 
           (b)  How lUIly fuaotioDII are th .. fIOIIll11 into aD arbitrary  '" B? 
           (0)  8how that the notab I XII,., implieitl7law1vt1 tIat .,... aU ...... 
     CHAPTER  II 
     The Real Number System 
                     The real numbel'a are basic to analysis, 10 we muat 
                  have a clear idea of what they are. It is pouible  to con-
                  struct  the  real number  ayatem in an entirely  rigoroua 
                  manner,  startinl  from  careful atatementa  of a  few of 
                  the buic principlea of let theory, • but we do not follow 
                  this approach  here for  two  reuone.  One  is that  the 
                  detailed  construction  of  the  real number8,  while not 
                  very difficult, is time-consuming and fite more properly 
                  into a courae on the foundations  of arithmetic,  and the 
                  other  reason is that  we already  "know"  the real num-
                  ben and would like to get down to buaill8ll8. On the 
                  other  hand  we have  to be lure of what  we are doing. 
                  Our procedure i.n this  book is therefore to ClHUmI  cer-
                  tain  basio  properties  (or  axioms)  of  the  real number 
                  .ystem,  all  of which  are  in  complete  agreement  with 
                  our intuition  and  all of which can be proved  easily in 
                  the COUl'l8  of any  rigoroua construction  of the .ystem. 
                  We then sketch  how moat 01 the falniliar properties  of 
                  the  real numbers  are  consequences of the  baeic prop-
                  erties &8IUDl8d and how theBe propertiee actually  com-
                  pletely  detmnine  the  real  numbera.  The  rest  of  the 
                  coune  will be built on this foundation. 
                  • The ... dartS prooedure far OOIII~Uq the nal DWIlben II u 
                  folio .. : ODe Int .. buIe .. theory  to de8De the llatural DUID-
                  ben  t1, 2, I, ••• ,  (wblob, to be&iD with,  are mantly a .. witb 
                  AD order relation),  thea ODe de8Dea the additloA ADd multlpllca-
                  tloA of _ural DWIlben &Del abow. that &heM operatloAa aatiIIy 
                  the famWar rulea of aIpbra.  UIi .. the naturaillWllben,  one thea 
                  de8n8II the .. , of iDt.epn  to, :1::1, :1::2, ••• , &Del exteDcia tbe op-
                  eratloAa 01 addition ADd multiplication  to all the int.epra,  apia 
                  verifyiq  the rulea 01 alpbra.  From the intepn ODe next obtailll 
                  the ratioD&l Dumben, or fractioAl. FiDalIy, from the raticmal 
                  Ilwnben 0118 ooutrllcta  the realilumben,  the buic  idea in tbIa 
                  Iut;  atep  bein,  that  a realilumber  II aomethiq  that  C&Il be ap-
                  proximated arbitrarily  cIoaeIy by ratlonailluJDben. (The  maau-
                  facture of  the  real  Ililmbera may  be  witDeal8d in  E. Landall'. 
                  FtlUr&d4IitnM of AftGlrN.) 
         16   II.  TRIl  RJlAL NUMBER  BYBTJIJI 
                                                          ,  ].  THE  FIELD PROPERTIES. 
              We define the real number .y.fem to be a Bet R together with an ordered 
                                   R X R into R that lIatillfy the eeven propertiee lilted 
         pair of functions from 
         in thill and the lIuccecding two eections of thill chapter.  The elementll of R 
         are  called  real number., or  jUllt number..  The  two  functions  are  called 
         addition  and  multiplication, and  they  make  correepond  to  an  element 
          (a, b) E  R X R specific element! of R that  are denoted  by a +  b and a • b 
         rt!llJpectively. 
               We IIpeak of tAe real number llyetem, rather than a real number eyetem, 
                   it will be shown at the end of thill chapter  that the lilted  propertit!IIJ 
          because 
          completely determine the real  numbers, in the eenee that  if we have  two 
         eyetems which satisfy our propertiee then  the  two underlying  eete R can 
          be put into a unique one-one correspondenoe in such a way that the func-
          tions  + and  • agree. Thus the  basic assumption  made in this chapter  is 
          that a system of real numbers exist!. 
               The five properties listed in this section are called the JW,d properties 
          becauee of the  mathematical  convention  calling a field any  set, together 
          with two functions + and  "  satisfying these propertiee. They expresa  the 
          fact that  the real numbers are a field. 
          PROPERTY'  I.  (COMMUTATIVITY).             For every a, b E R, V16 have 
                              a+b=b+a  and  a·b ... b·o. 
          PROPERTY  II.       (AasOCIATIVITY).      For  every  G, b, c E R,  tile  have 
                              (a +  b) + c ... a +  (b + c)  and  (G' b) • c - a • (h • c). 
          PROPERTY  III.      (DISTRIBUTIVITY).      For every a, h, c E R, tDf)  have 
                              a • (b + c) - a • b + a • c. 
          PROPERTY  IV.  (EXISTENCE  or NEUTRAL  ELEMENTS).                There are  diatind 
                              elementa 0 and  t  0/ R  IUCA that lor  all  a E R  tile  1aaH 
                              a+O-acmda·t  ... a. 
          PROPERTY      V.    (EXISTENCE  or ADDITIVE AND MULTIPLICATIVE  IHYEa_). 
                              For any a E  R there i. an element 0/ R, denoI«I -a, IUCA 
                              that 0 + (-0)  .... 0,  and /or any  non.nro a E R  tI&er. iI 
                                                                                  1 
                              an element 0/ R, denoted a-I,  IUCA that a • cr - 1. 
                Moat of the rulee of elementary  algebra can be justified by these five 
          propertiee of the real number system.  The main coneequencee of the field 
          propertiee  are  given in paragraphs  F 1 through  FlO  immediately  below, 
          together  with  brief demonstrations.  We shall employ the  common nota-
          tional  conventions  of elementary  algebra  when no confusion ill possible. 
                                                                     ,1.  rmLD PIIOPIIIm..     17 
         For example, we often  write ab for a • b. One auch convention  is already 
         implicit in the atatement  of the diatributive  property  (Property  III above), 
         where the expJ'el!8ion a • b + a • c ia meaninglet!8 unlet!8 we know the order 
         in which the various operations are to be perionned,  that is how parenth_ 
         ahould be inserted;  by  a • b + a • c we of course mean  (a • b) + (0 • c). 
         F 1.  In  a  aum  or  product  of several real  numberl  parentheaea  can be 
                 omitted.  That  ia, the  way  parentheaea  are  inserted  is immaterial. 
                 Thus  if a, b, c, dEB,  the expreBBion a + b + c +  d may be defined 
                 to be the common value of (0 +-(b + c»  +d - «0 + b) +  c) +cI-
                 (a +  b) + (c +  d) - a + (b +  (c +  d»  - "';  bt  these  expres-
                 aions with parentheaea indeed po88e8II a common value can be .hOWD 
                 by repeated application  of the aaaociative property.  The pneral  fact. 
                 (with  perhap8 more than  four .ummanda  or factol'l)  can be proved 
                 by atarting  with any meaningful expreBBion involving element.  of B, 
                 parentheaea, and several  +'a or several  ·'a,  and  repeatedly.hoving 
                 as many parentheaea as poesible all the way to the left, always ending 
                 up with an expJ'el!8ion of the type  «a + b) + c) + d. 
          F 2.   In a aum or product  of several real numbe1'8 the order of the tenna is 
                 immaterial.  For example 
                                    a·b·c-b·a·c-c·b·a=-                    •.•• 
                 Thia ia shown by repeated  application  of the commutative  property 
                  (together  with F 1). 
          F 3.   For any a, b E B the equation z + a ... b has one and only one 801u-
                  tion.  For  if  z E  B  ia  such  that  z + a - b,  then  z - z + 0 -
                  z + (a + (-a»  lOS  (z + a) + (-0) .. b + (-a),  80  z - b + (-0) 
                  ia the only poaaible 8Olution; that thia ia indeed a 8Olution is immedi-
                  ate. One consequence is that the element 0 of Property  IV is unique; 
                  another  is that  for  any  a E  B,  the  element  -a of  Property  V is 
                  unique. 
                For convenience, instead of b + ( -a) one usually writes b - Go (This is a 
          definition of the aymbol" -" between two element. of B.) Thus  -0 - 0 - Go 
                We take the opportunity  to reiterate  here the important  role 01 con-
          vention.  a + b + c has been defined (and by F 1 there iI only one I'8IIIOn-
          able way to define it),  but  we have  not yet defined a - b - c. 01 course 
           by the latter  expreaaion we und8l'8tand (a - b) - c, but it iI important  to 
           realiae  that  thia  ia  merely  convention,  and  reading  aloud the  worda "0 
           minus b minus c" with a aufficient pa.uae alter the fi1'8t "minus"  point.  out 
           that  our  convention  could  equally  well  have  defined  0  - b - c  to  be 
           0- (b - c). In this connection note the absence of any standard conven-
           tion  for a + b + c. In a similar  connection,  note  that'  could be taken 
           to mean (at)· if it were not conventionally  taken  to mean 0(11').  As atated 
          II  D. TIIII  u.u. IfVlllll •• 8Y8!'1111 
          above we UI8  aU the ordinary  notational  conventiOll8 when no confusion 
                         For example, without further ado we shall interpret an expres-
          can reeult. 
          lion like log 01 to mean log (01) and not (1oe 1.1)6, cab-I doee not mean (cab )-1, 
          etc. 
          I' 4.   For all)'  a, II E R, with a ,. 0, the equation _  - b baa one and only 
                  one lOIution. In fACIt from .. - II foiloWi Z - :IGCI""' -           bcrl, and from 
                  Z  -  fHrl  followt _  - b.  ThUi the  element 1 of  Propert,  IV  II 
                  unique and, liven any a E ., a ,. 0, the element er' of Property V 
                  is unique. 
                For 0, be R, a ,. 0, we de&ne b/a, in accord with convention, to be 
          ". cr. In  particular, erl  -         1/ea. 
          F S.  For any 0 E R we have 0  • 0 - O. ThiI is true linee 0  • 0 + a • 0 -
                  a • (0 + 0) - a • 0 - 0  • 0 + 0, 10 that 0  • 0 and 0 are both toIutiona 
                  of the equation Z + 0  • 0 - 0  • 0, hence equal, by F 3. From thiI it 
                  folloWi immediately that if a product of aevera! elementa of R is 0 
                  then one of the lacton  must be 0: for if cab - 0 and a ,. 0 we can 
                   multiply both lid.  by erl  to I~ II - O.  Hence the illegitimacy of 
                   diviaion by aero. 
           1'6.    -(-0)  - 0 lor any 0 E R. For both -(-o)-and  0 anlOlutiona 01 
                   the equation  s + (-0)  - 0, hence equal, by F 3. 
           PT.  (cr-')-I  - 0  for an111OftIel'O 0  E R. In fact Binee 0  • 0-1  -            I, by F 6 
                   we know that cr-' ,. 0, 10 (cr-')-I .... , and  F 4 impli.  that  (crl)-I 
                   and 0 an equal, IIinoe both are aoIutiODl 01 the' equation a: • crt - 1. 
           Fa.     -(0 + II) - (-0) + (-b)  for aU 0, II E R. For both are aoIutions 
                   01 the equation a: + (0 + II) - o. 
                                     I 
           1".  (cab)-' - er'b- if 0,"  an IlOIlIel'O  elements of  R.  For  cab,. 0  by 
                   F 5.10 (.)-1  eData, and both (cab)-' and cr'b-I are 101utions of the 
                   equation z(cab) - 1. 
                 The UIual rul.  for operatiq  with fractions followeuily  from F9: 
                                  ae                                             a 
                                -;;c - (ae)(be)-I - aeb-'c-'  - cab-I - b' 
                             o     c                  I                    ae 
                            T· '7 - (ab-I)(cd- )  - ac(btl)-,  -liif' 
                           ..!. +.!. _ ad  + l!.. _ (ad)(bd)-I  + (bc){bd)-' 
                            "      "      btl      btl 
                                      _  (ad + be)(btl)-,  _  atJ,:!; be • 
                                                                                  12. OUIIII    l' 
         FlO.      -G - (-1). GforallGER.  For (-1). G+. - G' «-1) + 1) -
                  G • 0 - 0, 80 that  (-1)  •• and  -G are both aolutiona of tbe equa-
                  tion  Z + II -    0,  hence are  equal.  Two  immediate  conaequeD0e8 
                  are  o· (-b)  - II' (-1) • b - (-1) • G' b - (-0) • b - -ab and 
                   (-0)'  (-b)  - -(0' (-b»  - -(-ab)  - abo 
               Notice  that  all five field properties  of the real numbera,  and therefore 
          all  CODIIeQU8llC8  of them,  are aatiafied by the rational  numbera,  or by the 
          complex numberB. That is, the rational  numbers  and the complex numbers 
          are alao fields. In fact there exist fields with only a finite number of elements, 
          the simplest one being a field with just the two elements 0 and 1. To describe 
          the real numbers  completely,  more properties  are needed. 
                                                                                    12.  ORDER. 
               The order  pl'Operty of the real number  8y8tem is the following: 
          PaoPIlRTY VI.  TAtn ia II au'-' ~ 01 R aucIa Ih.at 
                               (1)  if 0, b E ~, tIun a + 1>, a • b E ~ 
                               (')  lor CIA, a E H, one and onl,  one 01 1M 10Uot.oing elate-
                                    menta if ",.. 
                                                  aEa. 
                                                  .-0 
                                                -oEa.. 
                The elementa a E  R IUOh that a E a. will 01 coune be called poritiH, 
          tboee IUch tbat  -0 E ~ negoliH.  From  the  above  property  of R+ we 
          ebaIl deduce  all the usual  rules for worldng  with  inequalities. 
                To  be able  to  expre88 the  consequences  of  Property  VI  moat con-
          veniently  we intmduce  the relationa  ">" and  "<". For a, b E  R, either 
          of the expreesiona 
                                             a>b  or  b<1I 
           (read  respectively  &8  "a is greater than 1>"  and  "I> iii Jell  than a")  will 
           mean that a - I> E  ~. Either  of the expre88iona 
                                      , 
                                             a~b or  bSa 
           will mean that 0  > I> or 0  -    b. 
                Clearly  a E  a. if and only if a > O. An element  0 E  R is negative  if 
           and only if a < O. 
                The following are the consequences  of the order  property. 
           01.  (TrIoIaotomy).          II a, b E  R then one and only one of the following 
                   ltatementa  is true: 
                                                 0>1> 
                                                 a-I> 
                                                 o<b. 
                10        n. TBII  JtII'\L  NUMIIIlR  8T8T11)1 
                              For if we apply part  (2) of the order property  to the number (I  -                                                                      b 
                              then exactly one of three poeaibilities holda, (I  -                                                b E  R+. (I  -             Ii -     0, 
                             or b - (I E  R+, which are the  three  caBe8  of the 811ertion 0 1. 
                 02.  (Transitivity).                             If (I  >  band  b >  c then  (I >  c.  For  we are  given 
                              (I  -    b E  ~ and  b - c E  ~ j it therefore follows that 
                              (I  -    C -      (0 -       b) + (b - c) E R+, 110  (I > c. 
                03.  If (I > band  c ~ d  then  a + c >  b + d.  In  fact,  the  hypotheses 
                               mean  a-bER+,  c-dE~VIO), and  &II  a  consequence 
                              «(I  + c) -           (b + d) - (0 - b) + (c - d) E ~, proving the ueertion. 
                 04.  If a> b > 0  (meaning that  a> band  b > 0) and c ~ tl > 0, then 
                              GC >  bd. For  a - b E R+ and  c E ~, 110 GC - be - «(I  -                                                               b)c E  ~, 
                               and  similarly  c - d E ~ V  10)  and  b E ~ together  imply  that 
                               be - bd E ~ V  10) j  it  neceaearily follows that 
                              GC -       bd - (GC - be) + (be - bd) E~, that  i8 GC > bd. 
                           Note that the 888Umptiona that b and d are positive are e88eDtial j the 
                 uaertion  04  does not  hold,  for  example,  with  0 - 1,  b -                                                                    -1,  c - 2, 
                 tl- -3. 
                  o S.  The following rules of sign for adding and multiplying real numbers 
                               hold: 
                                     (positive  number) + (positive  number)  - (positive  number) 
                                     (negative number) + (negative number) - (negative number) 
                                      (positive  number)  •  (positive  number)  - (positive  number) 
                                      (positive  number)  •  (negative number)  - (negative number) 
                                      (negative number)  •  (negative number)  - (positive  number). 
                               These are immediate from F 10 and Property  VI. 
                  06.  For any  (I E  R  we have  ,.. ~ 0, with  the  equality  holding  only  if 
                               a .. 0; more general1y the IJUJIl of the squares of eevera1 element. of 
                                R is always greater  than  or equal to 181'0, with  equality  only if all 
                                the element.  in question are 181'0. For by 0 0, the statement  0 .. 0 
                                implies al  >  0, and a IJUJIl of positive elements is positive. Note the 
                                apecial  consequence 1 - 11> O. 
                   07.  If 0> 0,  then  l/a > O.  In  fact  o' (1/0)  - 1 > 0,  which  would 
                                contradict  the rules of sign if we had 1/(1 SO. 
                    08.  If a> b> 0,  then  l/a < l/b.  For  Gb > 0,  hence  (tJb)-l > 0,  110 
                                 (ab)-Ia >  (Gb)-Ib, which simplifies to  l/b>  l/a. 
                                                                           ,2.0RDD      11 
         09.  We now show how the computational  rules of elementary  arithmetic 
                work out aa consequences of our Ulumptiona.  Let UI make the defi-
                nitions  2 .. 1 + 1, 3 - 2 + 1, 4 - 3 + 1, etc., and let UI define the 
                natural  number.  to be the  Bet 11,2,3,  ... J. Since 1 > 0 it follow 
                that  0 < 1 < 2 < 3 < .. '. The let of natural  numbera  ie ordered 
                exactly aa we would like it to be-in particular,  the natural  numbera 
                have the following properties:  for any natural  numben  0, b. exactly 
                one of the statements  a < b, 0  -  b, b < 0  hoIdl; if a, ", c are natural 
                numbers  and a <" and b < c then aIao 0  < C; any natural number 
                baa an immediate  lucceeeor (i. leut  natural  number  that  II .,.ter 
                than  it);  different  natural  numben  have  different  immediate  100-
                ceeeors; and there  i. a natural  number  1 with the property  that any 
                Bet of natural  numbers  that  includes  1 and with  each element  aIao 
                its  immediate  succeeeor coDliste of  all  natural  numbers.  For  any 
                natural  number  n, n  il  the  sum  of a  set of  1'1 that  ie in one-one 
                correspondence  with  the  elements  of the set  (1, 2, 3, •.• , ",.  This 
                implies that in whatever  order we count off the elements of a let of 
                n  objects  (that  ii,  a  set  in  one-one  correspondence  with  the set 
                 (1,2,3,  ... , n I) we arrive at the final count n, and if a proper subeet 
                of a Bet of n objects  haa 11& objects,  then 11& < n. The uaua1 rules for 
                addilll  natural  numbera come from luch computationa  aa 
                     2 + 3 - (1 + 1) + (1 + 1 + 1) - 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 - 6, 
                 while the  rules  for  multiplication  follow from  the fact  that  lums 
                 of equal  terma  may  be written  aa products;  for example,  for  any 
                 a E  R  we  have  a + a + a - (1 + 1 + 1) • a - Sa.  ThUi  3· 4 -
                 4 + 4 + 4 - 12, 10 we can verify the entire  multiplication  table, .. 
                 high .. we care to go. The .nteg •• , that  ie tbe IUbIet  (0, =':1, =':2, 
                 =3,  .. '. J of  H,  are  also  ordered  in  the  correct  way  •.•  < -2 < 
                 -1 < 0 < 1 < 2 < ....  It il easy to  cheek  that  the  intepnl  add 
                 according to the ordinary  rules; that they  multiply  in the uauaI way 
                 i. implied by  FlO and the corresponding  fact  for the natural  num-
                bers.  The raltonal number.,  that  ie the elements  of H whicb can be 
                 written  alb,  with  0,  b integers  and  b.,. 0, are  aIao ordered  in  the 
                 usual way; indeed the order relation  of two rational  numbera can be 
                 determined  by  writing  the  two  numbers  with  a  positive  common 
                 denominator  and  comparing  the  numerators.  Addition  and multi-
                 plication of rational  numbers are aIao determined  by the IUD8 opera-
                 tiona  for  the  integers.  ThUi  the  rational  numbers,  a oertain  IUbiet 
                 of H, have all the arithmetic  and order properties  with wblcb we are 
                 familiar. 
               Here is aa good a place aa any to introduce  into our 10Iical ~on 
          of  the  real  number  system  the notion  of exponentiation  with  intepal 
          exponents.  If a E  Hand  n  is some  positive  integer  we define 0- to  be 
      •   Do ........  InJIISD_ 
       a • a • a ... a (n timel),  and if a ,. 0 we define .. - I, a- - 1/.-. From 
       theBe definitions we immediately  derive  the uaual rules of exponentiation, 
       in particular            ...... -..... 
                                 ( ... )a_.-
                                 (.).- .... 
          The de&nltloa of the abIoIute  value or a ... number  is lnOIIt con-
       veniently introduced at tbia point.: if a E R, the eNol.."  lHIluc of a, denoted 
       101, is aiven by      101- - if  _ > 0, 
                              t-I-  0  if  _ - 0, 
                              t-t- -- if  0<0. 
           The abaolute value baa the followiq  properties: 
       (1)  tal ~ 0 for alia E  R, and  tat - 0 if and only if _ - 0 
       (2)  tabl-Iat .'lI' for all a, 6 E R 
       (3)  I_I' - .. for all CI E R 
       (4)  ICI + 61s lal + 161 for alia, 6 E R 
       (6)  ICI-61~ 1101-1611 for aIlo,6ER. 
           The lilt three  properties  above ..... trivial  COD88qU8llC8l  of the defini-
       tion at I-I. To prove  (4) note tint. that 
                               :1:_ SI-I 
       (mMninl that _ S I_I and  -CI S ,at) and 
                               :1:6 S ,.,. 
       or 
                             lci+&lst-I+llIl. 
        To plOve (6), note t.bat.1al-l(a - 6) + 61 s ,_ - III +161,10 that 
                             ta.'-61 ~ 1_1-161· 
        Inteft:han&iDI _ and b, .,i, 
                            l~ - III ~ 161-1_1. 
        and the Jut two inequalities  combine into  (5). 
            It It ueful to note that repeated  application  of (4) gives 
                  1-+-+ .. · +ca.ISla.I+I .. I+ .. · +1a..1. 
                                                     ,a ........ v .... HUJlD  nonaTr    JI 
              We alao note the trivial  but very ueful  fact  that if z, 0, e E R, then 
                                             I:.: -01 < e 
         if and only if 
                                        0-.<:':<0+  •. 
         For  I:.: - 01 < e Ie precieely equivalent  to :.: - G < • and  -(:.:  - G)  < I, 
         or  -. < :.: - G < " which in turn  i. equivalent  to G -      e < :.: < G + e . 
                       ..... --- 1---.... 1 .. ' --- • ---"'1 
                       I                          I                           I 
                       I                          I                           I 
                       I                          I                           I 
                            l'Iouu  I.  Tbe poIDtullllGh that  ,_ - _, < e. 
              At the end of the previous aection a number  of other  BYStem. were 
         liven which .tiafy  the first five properties of the real number ay.tem. The 
         order property  exeludes two of the systems given there: the field coDllisting 
         of  just  the  two  elementa  0  and  1  (since  then 1 + 1 - 0,  contradicting 
          1 + 1 > 0),  and  the complex numbers  (since any  number  must  have  a 
         nonneptive  equare).  But  the  rational  numbers  .tiafy  all the  properties 
         &iven 10 far. Sinoe it Ie known that there aiat real numbera which are not 
          rational  (tbia wiD be proved  ehortly),  .till  more properties  are  needed to 
         d.mbe the real numbers completely. 
                                        ,So TIlE  LEAST UPPER BOUND PROPERTY. 
               To introduce the lut fundamental  property  of the real number system 
          we need the fonowina: concepti.  If 8 C R, then em UPfl'l' bound/or  at. ,., 8 
          Ie a number a E  R IUch that.  ~ a lor each • E 8. If the aet 8 baa &11 upper 
          bound,  we.y  that  8  Ie bourwIetl/rom GboH. We call a  real  number  11  a 
          ,." UPfI'I' bound 0/ at. .., 8 if 
               (1)  "it &11 upper  bound for 8 
          and  (2)  if G Ie any upper  bound for 8, then 11 ~ G. 
               From  this definition  it follows that  two least  upper  bounds  of a set 
          8 C R muat be I .. than or equal to each other,  hence equal. Thus a set 
          8 C R can have at most one leut upper bound and  we may apeak of at. 
          leut  upper  bound of 8  (if one exiata). Note alao the following important 
         14    U.  TIIII  HAL HUMalUl  BTIITIIM 
         fact: if 1/ls the least upper bound of 8 and z E  R, z < 1/, then there ate 
         an element.  E 8 lOch that z < •. 
               A nonempty  finite subset  8 C R always haa a least  upper bound  j in 
         thl.  cue the least  upper  bound is simply the greatest  element of 8. More 
         generally any IUbset 8 C R that haa a greatest  element  (usually denoted 
         max 8) haa max 8 aa a least upper bound. But an infinite IUbset of R need 
         not  have a least  upper  bound,  for example, R  iteelf baa no upper  bound 
         at all. Furthermore,  if a subset 8 of R haa a least upper bound it dOM not 
         necesaarily follow that  this  least  upper bound  is in 8 j for example, if 8  is 
         the set of all negative  numbers  then  8  haa no greatest  element,  but any 
         a ~ 0 is an upper bound of 8 and zero (a number noe in 8) is the least upper 
         bound of 8. 
               The laat axiom for the real number ayetem il the following, which gives 
         a further  condition on the ordering of Property  VI. 
         PaOPDTY  VII.  (LJlA8T  UPPER  BOUND  PROPBRTY).                 A  raonemply  "' 0/ 
                               real number. tIuJl i. botmckd /rom aboH 1&tJI a l«ut upper 
                               bound. 
               If we look at the real numbers geometrically, imagining them plotted 
         on a straight  line in the usual manner of analytic  geometry,  Property  VII 
          becomes quite  plausible.  For  if 8 C R  is nonempty  and  bounded  from 
          above then either 8 baa a greatest  element or, if we try to pick a point in 8 
          aa far to the rilht  aa poeeible, we can find a point in 8 luch that no point 
          in 8  il more than  a diltance  of one unit  to the  right of the choeen point. 
          Then  we can pick a point  in 8  farther  to the  right  than  the first choeen 
          point and lOch that no point in 8  il more than  one-half unit  to the right 
          of this second chosen point,  then  a  point  of 8  ltill  farther  to the  rilht 
          lOch that no point of 8 is more than one-third  unit to the right of the lut 
          choeen point,  etc. It is intuitively  clear that  the sequence of choeen pointe 
          in 8  must  "gang  up"  toward  some point  of R, and  this last  point  will be 
          the least upper bound of 8. (See Figure 6.) 
               Another way to justify  Property  VII in our minds is to look upon the 
          real numbem u  represented  by infinite decimals, i.e., symboll  of the form 
                                         (inteRer) + .fIttJIfII ••• , 
          where each of the symbols aI, «It, fit,  •••  is one of the integers 0, 1,2,  ... ,9, 
          with the symbols  <. >. +. . being interpreted  for infinite decimals in the 
          standard  way. (Note  that  any  terminatinl  decimal can be coneidered an 
                                                                         ,  ,  I" II 
                   -1       o               2       a 
               FrQ1J1UI 8.  A aequence 01 pointe  in R pngiq  up toward, a Ieut upper  bound. 
                                                             ,3.  LZAIIT UPPZR  BOUND PROPRRTT        25 
          infinite decimal by adding an infinite string of  zeros.) If 8 is a nonempty 
          set of infinite decimals that  is bounded  from above, then  we can find an 
          element of 8 whose integral part is maximal, then an element of 8 having 
          the same integral  part  and with al maximal, then an element of 8 having 
          the same integral part and same al with CIt maximal, and we can continue 
          this proCeBIJ indefinitely,  ending up  with  an  infinite  decimal  (which  may 
          or may not be in 8) which is clearly a leut upper bound of 8.· 
                The least  upper  bound  of a subset  8  of R  will be denoted  l.u.b.  8; 
          another common notation is sup 8 (sup standing for the Latin IUprlm"m). 
          Property  VII  says that  l.u.b. 8  exists whenever 8 C R is nonempty  and 
          bounded from above. ConveJ'8ely, if 8 C R and l.u.b. 8 exists, then 8 must 
          be nonempty (for any real number is an upper bound for the empty I18t and 
          there is no least real number)  and bounded from above. 
                Analogous to  the  above  there  are  the  notioll8 of lower  bound  and 
          greatest lower bound: a E R is a lo1Der bound for the subset 8 C R if CI S , 
          for each,  E 8, and a is a greate8llower bound of 8 if a is a lower bound of 8 
          and  there  exists no larger one. 8  is called bounded from bek>w if it has a 
          lower bound. It follows from Property  VII that every set 8 of real numben 
           that  is nonempty  and  bounded  from below has a  greatest  lower bound: 
           as a matter  of fact, a set 8 C R is bounded from below if and only if the set 
           8' = Ix:  -x E 81  is bounded  from  above,  and  if 8  is  nonempty  and 
           bounded from below then  -l.u.b.  8' is the greatest lower bound of 8. The 
           greatest  lower bound of a subset 8 of R is denoted g.1.b. 8; another  nota-
           tion is inf 8  (inf abbreviating  the Latin  infimum). If S has a  smallest ele-
           ment (for example, if S is finite and nonempty)  then g.l.b. S is simply this 
           smallest element, often denoted min S. 
                 We proceed to draw some consequences of Property VII. Among other 
           things  we shall  show  that  the  real  numben  are  not  very  far  from  the 
           rational numbers, in the IJenlJe that any real number may be "approximated 
           as closely as we wish" by rational numben.  The way to view the situation 
           is that  the  rational  numben  are  in  many  ways  very  nice, but  there  are 
           certain "gaps"  among them that may prevent us from doing all the thinp 
           we would like to do with numben,  such as eolving equatioDl (e.g., extracting 
           roots),  or  measuring  geometric objects,  and  the  introduction  of the  real 
           numbeJ'8 that are not rational  amounts  to closing the gape. 
                 Here are the coll8equences of the least upper bound property: 
           • Let UI remark  here that once the .... of Intepnll  known, topther  with their addldoD 
           and  multiplication,  It II pouible  to oonltruct  the real number  eyatem  by de8DIna real 
           numbel"l by mean.  of In&nlte deelmall.  TbIa II in fact  the way real numberl  .. uaua1Iy 
           introduced  in elementary arithmetic,    and we bow how euy It. II to oompute  with deci-
           mal •.  But  there  are  a few inconveniencee  in thll  method  atemmlnl  from  the  fact. that. 
           lOme number8  have  more than  one decimal  reprNeDtation  (e.g., .9119 •••  - 1.000 ••• ). 
           There  II allO the esthetic  inconvenience  of IiYinI  a preferred  .tatUi  to the number  10-
           almOllt a  biololical  accident.  In  any  caee we ehan  dilCUil later  in thia _tion  how the 
           leven  properties  of real  numben  imply  that  they  can  indeed  be repreeented  by in&Dite 
           decimal.,  thull completinl  the circle with  elementary  arithmetic. 
               •        D.  TIm UAL HVIIBU  1'fftIIII 
               LUB  1.               For any real number s, there is an integer"  such  tha\  R > s. 
                                     (In other words, there exist arbitrarily  large integers.) To prove 
                                     this,  &Illume we have a real number s for which the &ll8ertion is 
                                     wronc. Then R :s; s lor each intepr  R, 10 that \he let of intepra 
                                     iI bounded  from above. Sinee the set of integen  is nonemp\y 
                                     it hal A 1 .. upper bound, ... y .. But for any inte&er R, R + 1 
                                     fa alIO an intepr,  10 R + 1 S • and  thUi R :s; • - 1, ahowinl 
                                     that.  - 1 Ia Il1o aD upper bound  for the set 01 inteprl.  Bince 
                                     CI  -    1 < ., • ia not Aleut upper bound. This ia A conU8diction. 
               LUB  2.               For aDy positive  real number  • there exists an integer  Rauch 
                                     that  l/R  < .. (In other words, there  are arbitrarily  ama1l posi-
                                     tive  rational  numben.)  For the proof it auflicee \0 choose an 
                                     integer"  > II.,  which  is  poeaible by  LUB 1, then  use 08, 
                                     which iI peranilaible linee  by 07 we have  11. > o. 
               LUB 3.                For any s E R there is aD intepr  "  luch  that R :s; s < " + 1. 
                                     To prove this, choose an intepr N > I s I , 80 that  -N < a: < N. 
                                     The intepn  from  -N \0 N form the finite let (-N,  -N + 1, 
                                      ... ,0,1,  ... , Nt aDd all we need do is take" \0 be the greatest 
                                     of these that is 1_ than or equal \0 s. 
                LUB 4.                For any  a: E  R and positive  integer  N, there  Ia  aD intepr  " 
                                     lUeh that 
                                                                                !!.. ....     < R+l 
                                                                                N;;::s                 N' 
                                      To show thia we merely have \0 apply  LUB 3 \0 the number 
                                      Ns, pttilllaD  integer,.  lUeh that"  :s; Ns <" + 1. 
                LUB So                If s, • E R, • > 0, then there exist. A rational  number,  aueh 
                                      that  Is - '1 <..  (In  other  worda, A real  number  may  be 
                                      approximated  M  elolely .. we wiIh by a rational  number.)  To 
                                      prove  this,  11M LUB 2 to  find a positive  inteler  N IUch that 
                                       liN <.,  then  use  LUB ..  to  find  an  integer  "  lUeh  that 
                                      "IN :s; a: < (,. + 1)/N.  Then  O:S; a: - nlN < liN <"                                                               so 
                                       Is -RINI < •. 
                         w. now diacUil the decimal NpNleDt.ation of real numbers.  Firat oon-
                 aid 
                      .. &nite decimala.  If ... Ia any  intepr,  "  any  positive  integer,  and 
                 Cla,",  ••• , ...  aDy intepra  choeeo from  amonl  0, 1,2,  ... ,9,  the  Iymbol 
                                                                           .............. 
                 win mean,"  usual, the rational  number 
                                                                        CI.          CIt                      CIa 
                                                            "'+10+  10' + ... + 10-' 
                                                                   13.  I&UT VPPU BOVill)  norllllTY            17 
           If m is a positive integer leu than n, then 
                a
             (Io. l· •• a. ~ (10.41 ••• a. == (Io.al ••• a. + CIwo+l • 10-<00+1) + . .. + a. • Ur 
                                              ~ (Io.al"  .0. + 9 • 10-<00+1) + ... + 9· l(r. 
           If we add 10 ...... to this last  number a lot of cancellation OCCUl'I,  resulting in 
                                (10.41 •• • 0. ~ (Io.al • • • a. < (10.41 •• • 0. + 10'-. 
           Thia laat  inequality  is  at  the  bue  of  moet  rounding-otr  procedures  in 
           approximate  calculations and in addition  &bow8 that  two numbera in the 
           above decimal form are equal only if (except for the poBBible addition  of a 
           number of seroe to the right, which doesn't change the value of the 8ymbol) 
           they have the eame digits in corresponding places. It aI80 enables us to tell 
           at a glance which of two numbers in the given form is larger. The ordinary 
           lilIes for adding and multiplying numbera in thi8 form are clearly legitimate. 
                  By an inftnm  tkcimal we mean a formal expression 
                                                        (Io.a.asaa ••• 
            (this is just another  way of writing a sequence) where Go is an integer and 
           each  of  ai, tit, III,  •••       is  one  of  the  integers  0, I, ... ,9.  The  let 
            ((Io.al ••• a.  : n  -   positive integert  is nonempty  and  bounded  from above 
            (for any integer m > 0, Clg.al ••• a. + 10- is an upper bound)  hence baa a 
            leut upper bound. The 8ymbol (Io.GllJa1i1. ••  is called a dBc1mal "pamion  for 
            thilleut  upper bound and we eay that the least upper bound is ,qreunted 
            br the infinite decimal. Thus every infinite decimal is a decimal expansion 
            for a definite real number and we may use the infinite decima.l it.lelf aa a 
            symbol for the number. Thus 
                          Qo,a.asaa •••  -    l.u.b.  ((Io.al."a.  : n  -      positive inteprt, 
            and for any positive integer n we have the inequality 
                                 (Io.al • • • a.  ~ ao.allJalil •.•  ~ Go.al •• • a. + 10-. 
            This enables us to tell immediately  which of two infinite decimals repre-
            sents  the  larger  real number.  Note  that  two  different  infinite  decimala 
            may  be  decimal  expansions  for  the  eame  real  number,  for  example 
            5.1399999 ...  - 5.1400000 ... , but the last inequality 8hows that different 
            infinite decimale are decimal expansions for the earne real number only in 
            this cue,  that  is when we can get one infinite decima.l from the other  by 
             replacing one of the digits 0, I,  ... ,8 followed by an infinite sequence of 
             nines by the next higher digit followed by a sequence of leros. 
                   Any real number  is represented  by at leut  one infinite decima.l. To 
             8ee this, apply LUB 4 to the cue N ... 10"', where m is any positive integer: 
             we get a finite decima.l ao.Ol •• • 0. luch  that 
                                        (Io.al ••• a. S z < ao.al ••• a. + 10-. 
          18    II.  TIIJI  ftl!lAL  !roMB •• STIITSM 
          If we try doing this for m + 1 in place of m, then ao and the digits ai, ... , a". 
          will not change, and we simply get another  digit Il00+1. Letting  m get larger 
          and larger, we get more and more digits of an infinite decimal, and this is 
          our desired decimal expansion for~. Note  that  the addition  or multiplica-
          tion of two infinite decimals goes according to the usual rules: we round off 
          each decimal and add or multiply  the corresponding  finite decimals to get 
          a decimal approximation  of the desired sum or product.  We obtain  u  many 
          digiti u  we wiah of the decimal expansion of the sum or product by rounding 
          01 the given infinite decimals to a sufficiently large number of places. 
               Using decimal  expansions of real numbers,  it is very  easy to exhibit 
          real numbers which are not rational.  One such number  i • 
                                     • 101001000100001000001. ..  . 
          Multiply  this by any positive integer  and one gets a number  which is not 
          an integer, 80 this number  cannot  be rational. 
                                             f 4.  THE  EXISTENCE OF SQUARE ROOTS. 
               It is convenient  to prove here a special result, even though  this can be 
          derived &8 a consequence of a much more general theorem to be proved later. 
                A square root of a given number is a number whose square is the given 
          number.  Since the  square  of any  nonzero  number  is positive,  only  non-
          negative  numbers  can have square  roots. The number  zero bu one square 
          root,  which i. lero iteelf. 
                If 0 < XI < z. then  ZI' < ~. That  is, bigger  positive  numbers  have 
          bigger squares. ThUl any given real number  can have at most one poeitive 
          square  root.  It remains  to show that if a E  R, a > 0, then  a hu at least 
          one positive square  root.  For this purpose consider the set 
                                      B - {~E R : ~ ~ 0, ~ Sal. 
          Thia  set  is  nonempty,  since.O E  B,  and  bounded  from  above,  since  if 
          X  > max /a, I}  we  have  ~ - Z • Z  > x • I  == x > a.  Hence  y ... l.u.b.  B 
          exist..  We proceed to show that"  - a. First,  y > 0,  for  min  {I, al E  B, 
          since (min (1,0»'  S min {l,a}  ·1 - min /1,a}  S a, Next,  for any. such 
           that 0 < • < y  we have  0 < y - • < y < y + e, 110 
                                         (y - e)' < 11' < (y + e)', 
           since bigger positive  numbers  have  bigger squares.  By the definition  of y 
           there are numbers  greater  than  y - • in B, but y + • E B. Again using the 
           fact that bigger positive numbers  have bigger squares,  we get 
                                          (y - e>' < a < (y + e)l. 
            Hence 
                                         I,. - cal < (y + e)' - <r - e)' - 4, .. 
            The inequality  I,. - cal < 4y.  holds for any  • auch  that  0 <. <"  and 
            by  chOOling e IImall enough we can make 4,. 1_ than any pree iped 
            positive  number.  ThUll  I,. - cal  ill 1_ than  any  poaitive number.  Since 
             1111  -  01  ~ 0, we must  have 111' - 01  - 0, proving 11' - a. 
                   If a > 0, the unique  positive IIquare root of •  ill denoted  ..,;a; thua 
            CI  hu exactly  two lIquare roots, namely  va and  -V-. W. &leo wriM 
            V1f -0. 
                   We now know that the positive real numbera are precilely the aquaNI 
            of the nonsero real numbers. Thill ,how that the .. t of politi .. n ...... 
            R+ whose exilltence ill affirmed by  Property  VI ill completely determined 
            by  the  multiplication  function  of R.  A priori,  it mipt  IMID  tha.  there 
            could be several pcaible  IUbsets R+ of R for which Properti .. VI aDd VII 
            hold and that in any dilleUllllion of the ordering of R the ..........  .,... 
            have to be specified, but we now know this to be unneeeaaary. The .. B, 
            together with the functioDII + and " determine the oreleriDi of B. It taa.. 
            fore follow  that  the decimal expanaiODll of element.  of B are comple&e17 
            determined by the triple  (B, +, .,. Sine.  the addition and multiplieatlon 
            of decimale follow the usual rul .. of arithmetic,  1M real " ......  .,.,. iI 
            compleUly tlUrmined  by  ProptJr'iu I-VII,  in  the IeDII8  that  if  we bave 
            another  triple  (B', +', ."  IIotillfying theee properti .. then  there wiD 8IdIR 
            a unique on~ne correspondence between B and B' ...-villi  IUIDI and 
             product..  ThUll we may speak of tAe real number 1)'Stem. In fact one ofteo 
            llpeaks of "the real numbers R", meaning the real number .,aleMj  this ill 
             IItrictly speaking erroneoUII, aince B  ill merely a .. and we allO bave  to 
             know what the operatiollll + and  • on thiII set are, but when there llno 
             danger of confusion thill ill a convenient abbreviation. 
             PROBUNS 
              1.  Show that there exIatI em. and ( ... tIalI)')  oaI)' cmelleld with three ...... 
              2.  Prove in detail that for any ca, 6, e, • e R 
                   (a)  - (G - 6) - 6 - G 
                   (b)  (G -     b)(e -    II) -   (ae + lid) -      <M + be). 
              3.  Prove that if G, 6 E R and G < 6 < 0, thea 1/. > 1/6. 
              4.  (a)  11223/71 greater than 22/71 
                   (b)  Ie 285/163 peater  thaD 1361/7801 
               •         U.  'I'I1II  UAL IIUID_ ft8'I'IIII 
                  I.  For which s E R are the foUowiDc iDequalities true? 
                        (a)  3(s+2)<s+6 
                        (b)  s' - &:e - 6 ~ 0 
                        (0)  ! > s-1 
                                e 
                        (d)  -L. >S+8>O. 
                                s-3
                  a.  Show lbat If a, 6, ., r e R aad ° < • < 6, • < r < 6, then Ir - _I < 6 - a. 
                  7.  Show that for IUIY 0, 6 e R, 
                                              max 10,61 _ a + 6 +21a - 61 
                                              min 10,61- _mul_a,_61._a+6-2Ia-bl. 
                  8.  The..apla  II ..........  II de&Ded to be the .t C - R X B (caDed the 
                         ...". ........ )  topther  with the two fUDOtioDa from C X C into C, de-
                         DO&ecl by  +  aDd  "  tllat  are  amm by  (0, 6) +  (e, 4) - (a + e, 6 + cI)  aDd 
                         (0, ') • (e, cI) -           (e - W, GIl + Ie) for aU ., t, c, " e .. 
                         (a)  Show that C, toptt.  with the fuDctioaI + aDd "  II a field. 
                          (b)  Sbow that the map from. B into C which .. -.ch a E  B into (0, 0) II 
                                  ~ UId .~ nI IIddit.IoD aad IIlIIltipUaatioD" (beiq  eanflll  to 
                                  debe the IDIUIiJIi ar the worda ia quotea). 
                          (0)  I_til,..  B with a ..... ar C by __ ar part  (b)  (10 that we oaa 
                                  ooIIIkler •  C C) aad ..... ~ - (0, 1), Ihow that 11- -1 aad dlat-.ch 
                                  element ar C oaa be writ_ iD a uaique way .. ° + W, with a,6 e B. 
                    I.  Ja the IUbiat  liS ar • bouaded from above or below? no. it have lUI I.u.b. or 
                          a,.I.b.? 
                  10.  I'IDd tbe ,J.b.  aDd La.b. ar tbe lolIcnrbaa ... alvill, reuoua If you CUI. 
                          (a)  {I,I,l,i, ... } 
                          (b)  {l,~,~,~, ... } 
                          (0)  {VI,v'2+J1,  "2+v'2+v'I,  ... }. 
                  n.  Prove that If a E B, 0> 1, thea the -' la,",",  ... 1 II not bounded from 
                          above. (BiN:  lint &ad a poeitive intepr  "  IUch lbat G > 1 + ~ and prove 
                          that .. > (1 +~r ~ 2.) 
                  12.  1M X aad Y be DODfIIIlP'Y 1Ubeet. ar R whole wdon II R and IIIlCb tllat -.ch 
                          ...... t  aI X II ... thaa  each element aI Y. Prove that  there exiata a E • 
                          ... that X II ODe aI the two .. 
                                                      I. e B : •  S 01                     or          ,. e B : •  < al. 
                   IL  D", S. are _pty IUbeete of R lbat are bo1lllded from above, prove that 
                                              La·b.I.  + r :. e 8" r e Btl -l.u.b.  8, + I.u.b. Bt. 
                                                                             J'8OUoD8    II 
         Ij.  Let CI, •  E B, with CI < •. Show that. there exiata Ii IlWDber II E B aueh that. 
              • < II < " with s rat.ioDal or DOt ratioDal, .. we 1riIh. 
         16.  "A real Dumber is rational if and only if it baa a periodic decimal exp&IIIIion." 
              Define the p ..... nt ueaae of the word periodic and prove the 8tatement. 
         18.  Deolma1 (1G-Dary) eapIoIIIiona 01 real Dumbers were deftoed b), apeolal refer-
              eace to the Dumber 10. Show that real Dumbers bave b-rwy  expanaioDl with 
              IoD&lopua propenieI,  w .... " ia an)'  iIltepr"poeatar  than 1. 
    CHAPTER  III 
     Metric Spaces 
                 Moat. of  elementary anaIyaia iI concemecl with 
               funetione of one or more real variablee, that. functions 
               defined on a subeet of the real  Une, 01' the plaae,  or 
               ordinary  3-epaee or,  more  pneraJly,  tHtimeneioul 
               Euclidean  space.  The  real  Une, plane,  etc.  are ..,... 
               c ... of the po"'" concept of "meVic tpaCe" which iI 
               introduced in tm. chapter.  W. alto introduce.  con-
               venient  pometric  laquap  for d-.1iDl  with ...ned 
               "topolocical"  queationa, which are queetiona .... &ed 
               with the notion of "pointe  DIU'  eaoh I~', • DOt1on 
               that ia a priori rather  vape.  The ideu we cleYelop ean 
               be applied to any metric apaee at aD. This _  oob' pIO-
               videa a great economy of thought, IIince it will be ..... 
               I&l'Y to introduce a new idea only once inItead of-viOl 
               to  define it for each lpeCial cue tbat IDA1 0CCUl',  "'" 
               will &lao lead to  productive new 'Wa7I of looIdas at 
               familiar  objecte.  ThUl  one  lingle  proof wiD eonr·aIl 
               C8lellimuitaneously  and a certain ..-1\ .... III • 
               manner aliptly  out of the ordiDu7, mat ..... ..... 
               unapec$ed and far...reachina ~ u  will be 
               eeen later  when other eumpa. of metric ......... 
          M     IU.  IOTIUC  "  ... CII8 
                                   11.  DEFINmON  OF METRIC SPACE. EXAMPLES. 
               A metric apace ia a let topther  with a rule which UIOClatei with each 
          pair 
               01 elemente 01 the let a .... number IUOh that certain axiom. are_tII-
          fleel. The axiom. are chc.eD in auch a manner that it la nuooabl.  to think 
          01 the .. t .. a "apace" (a word w. cIon't bother to define in iIolation), the 
          elamente of the aet .. "pointe", and the real nUmber UIOCiated wiUa two 
          elements of the set .. the "diat&nce between two pointe". Here is the preciae 
          definition: 
          ~don.. A metric Ipaee is a _  B, together with a rule which UIOCiatea 
          with each pair p, I E  B a real number d(p, f) luch that 
                (1)  d(p, ,) ~ 0 for all p, IE B 
                (2)  d(p, f)  - 0 if and only if p - I 
                (3)  d(p, f)  - d(f, p) lor all p, ,  E  B 
                (4)  d(p, r)  S d(p, f) +  d(f, r) for all p, f. rEB (triangle inequality). 
                Thua a metric apace is an ordered pair  (B, 11), where B ia a let and d 
          a function d: B X B .... B l&tiIfyiq  properti.  (1)-(4).  In dealiq  with a 
           metric apace (8, II) it II olten undentood  lrom tbe context what d la, or 
           that a certain apeeiflc d II to be borne in mind, and then one often apeab 
           limply of "the mekic  apace B"; thia II IoPcallY incorrect but Vert con .. 
           venien'- The elamente p, I, r, 0'0  of a  metric IPM8 B (to be ahlolutelJ 
           co~ welhould BAY "the elements. of the underlyiq  Bet 8 of the metric 
           apace (8,4)",  but let 111 not be too pedantic)  are called the pointe 01 B, 
           and if p, fEB w. call d(p, f) the diaItJnce lHrCtDem p _              fj d itaell is called 
           the tlitIGrtce /vrtI:litm, or tIIAIIric. 
                 Here are lOme exampl.  of metric ap&ceI: 
                 (1)  B -. (the let of reU numben), d(p, f) -I, - fl. 
           The 8mt three metric apace axiom. obviously hold. The fourth foUowa from 
           the computation 
                     d(p, r) -I p - rl -I (p - ,) + (, - r) I Sip - 91 + 1 I - rl 
                                           - d(p, f) + d("  r). 
                 (2)  For &Il1 pci.ttive integer "  we define a  metric apace B·,  called 
           Hi~ Bucli4eaft apace, by takiq the underlyiq  let of B" to be all 
           ,....plea of real numbera (Ga, ••• , cr.) : Ga, ••• , cr. E  B I, and definiDl, !or 
           , .. <-I, 0.0' .. ), I  -   (f" 0  o. ,.,.), 
                        d(p, f} _  Vr.(a:-I---.,-:.):-=-I-:-+-:(a:.~_-"':-::I-:+-•• -, -::+-=(;-.. -_-.,'7:.)1, 
                                                                    ,1.  JI8IIII1'I'IOII  01' .... 0  UAmI     II 
                 We DUId pI'Oft  tbM .. II '''''IT  .. metric apace. The flrIt  three 
           metric apace uiomI U'8 t.riYill to ftrify.  10 it remainII to prove the trian&le 
           inequality.  We need two preliminary  neultl. 
           Propoatdoa (SeA ...... ........,.".).                  'ar _, ,.., ""'"  CIt, a., ...• a.., 
           "., lit. .........  Ac. 
                 -IGtbt + Ga6.+ • ",-+~""'~I~_~ 
                                             l 
                                   :S ..; Clt + 01 + ... + .. 1 ..; btl + bI + ... + bal. 
                  The proof  ItartI  with  the  remark  that  for any  a, fJ E R we have 
           o :S (CICIi - fJb,.)1 + (ClOt - fJb,)1 + ... + (aa.  - fJb.)1 
              -  «'(Gal + 01 + ' .. + .. 1) - ~(Gaba + Ot/Ja + ..• + .... ) 
                                                                                   l 
                                                                          + lJI(bt + bI + ... + b.'). 
                                     l                         l 
           Ifw ... ta- ";ba +bI + .oo +ba andfJ - z"; CIt +oI+·oo +a..', 
           thelut  inequality becoJnel                                                 '
                       I                      l 
           o :S 2(Clt + ... + .. I)(b + ... + ,I) 
                                              a
                            =F 2"; Gal + ... + Gal  ";~b-=--1-:-+-'-'-' ~+-:~-=-I  (Gtbt + oo. + a.b.), 
            or 
            z"; CIt'+ ... + .. 1  ..; b' + ... + b.' (Gaba + ... + .... ) 
                                                a               :S (8-1 + ... + .. I)(btl + , .. + ,I). 
            or 
            ..; 81+ .. · + .. ' ";bll               ... +b.'IGabJ+"· + .... 1 
                                                + 
                                                                                               l 
                                                                 :S (G,I + .oo + .. I)(bt + ... + 6.1). 
                                         1                l                 l 
            If  ..; Gal + .,' + Gr.         and  ..; ba + . , . + ba           are  both  nOlllero  we  can 
            divide by their plOduct to I8t the cleBired inequality. If, on the other band, 
            either  ..; Gal + ... + .. 1  -          0  or  ..; btl + ... + "  -= 0,  then  either 
            Ga -    •••  -   a.. - 0 or bt -      •• , -, - 0, and the cleBired inequality reducee 
            to O:S o. 
                                                                                                        t 
             Corollary.        Par -II  ,..,  II~' Ga, a., "., a., b, ba, , •• , ba  we  have 
                                                                                      a
                   ..; (CIt + ba)1 + Co. + bs)1 + .,' + (a. + ba)1 
                                 :S ..; Gal + 01 + oo. + Gal + v'r-::~-=-I-:-+-:bI~+'---· ,-, -+-:~:-,- . 
                   To prove thII write 
             (Ga + bs)' + (ae + bs)1 + .,. + (Ga + b.)' 
                           -   (8-1 + 01 + ... + 0.1) + 2(aa6a + a.bt + ... + .... ) 
                                                                                 +  l 
                                                                                     (b + bI + . , . + 11.1). 
                                                                                        a
         36    III.  MIlTRIO  8PAOl!l8 
         By the Schwarz inequality  the laat expreeeion is 1888 than (\\' equal to 
          (til' + CIt' + ... +~IJ,.::...:I):..-.:---c-_---,---= 
                      + 2V til' + CIt' + ... + IJ,.' V b'  + bi + ... + b .. ' 
                                                             t   + (b'  + bi + ... + b .. ,) 
                                                                       l
         which equale 
                     ( V til'  + CIt' + ... + IJ,.' + V ba + bi +  •••  + b .. ·)'. 
                                                            ' 
          Thus 
          (/It + ba)' + (tit + ba)' + ... + (IJ,. + b,.)' 
                               S (V til' + CIt' + ... + IJ,.' + V ba' + bi + ... + b .. ')·. 
          The desired reeult comes from this lut inequality  and the comment that 
          ifOSsS,thenv'i  S Vi, 
               We can now verify the triangle inequality  for J!lra. Let P - (Zit  ••• , z..), 
          q - (fIl, ••• t 11 .. ), r .. ('1, ... , ... ).  Then 
          d(p, r) ..V (211 - ,tl' + . . . + (z.. - ... )' 
                   .. V«SI- fls) + <111-,S», + ... + «z.. ~ fI .. ) + (fl .. - ... », 
                   s V (211 - fit)' + ... + (z.. - , .. )' + V (fit - ,s), + ... + (U .. - ... )' 
          by the CoroUary, 10 that 
                                       d(p, r} S d(p, q) + d(q, r). 
          Thus J!lra it a metric ep&Ce. 
                We note that J!lra is a generalization of the first example, since ga is 
           simply R with d(p, q) == Ip - ql. 
                (3)  If 1£ is a metric apace and 1£1 it a subset of B then HI can be made 
           a metric apace in an obvious way: the diatance between two pointa of Bl 
           it the .me as the diatance between them when they are considered pointa 
           of B. That B , together with ita metric, aatiafies our four axioms it immedi-
                          l
           ate. El, with its metric, it called a ~ of B. Note that by taking aubaeta 
           of Euclidean ,pace we get an infinite number of metric Space8,  in a tre-
           mendous variety of ail8ll and shapes. 
                (4)  Let E be an arbitrary  let and,  for p, q E  H, define d(p, q) - 0 if 
           p - q, d(p, q) - 1 if p pi q.  This it clearly a metric ep&Ce. It is a very 
           special  kind  of  metric space,  quite  unlike the  previous examples, hut 
           illustrates  nicely the  generality  of the concept  with which we are dealing. 
                                                                          12. 0 ... AIID CLOUD 111ft         IT 
                 In this  text we shall for the moat part be interested  in g. and ita aub-
           spaces, ,but other  important  metric IIpaceI  will allO appear and inde.l  will 
           IOmetim.  be introduced  to prove Wop about .. itaelf. 
           "ropoalelon.         1/ PI, PI, •.. , p. en poW. 0/ Ute meIric .. H, .. 
                          d(P .. p.)  S d(Pl, Ptl + d(p., pal + ... + d<p-.,  N. 
                 This com. from repeated  application  of the trianPe  inequality: 
            d(PI, p.)  S d(p,., PI) + d(p., p.)  S d(pa, Ptl + d(pa, PI> + d(p., p.) S ... 
                         S d(PI, PI) + d(p., PI> + ... + d<P-a, p.). 
           "ropoalelon.         1/ p, f, r are poi""  of 1M metric .,.. H, IIaen 
                                           I d(p, r)  -  d(f, r) I S d(p, f). 
                 This i. 8III8Iltially the  well-known fact  of  elementary  geometry  that 
           the difference of two aides of a triancle  is I .. ~ the third aide. To prove 
           it note that 
                     d(p, r) S d(p, f) + d(f, r)  and  d(f, r) S de"~ p) + d(p, r), 
           which can be rewritten 
                     d(p, r) - d(f, r) S d(p, ,)  and  d(f, r) - d(p, r) S d(f, p), 
           which combine to 
                                            I d(p, r)  -  d(f, r) I S  d(p, f). 
                                                                     12. OPEN AND CLOSED SETS. 
            DeJinieioru.        Let E be a metric apace, PI E B, and r > 0 a realnUlllber. 
           Then the opm ball in E 0/ center PI _                 radiUl r is the aubeet of B pftll by 
                                               (p E H : dc,., p) < rl. 
            The cloMl ball in E 0/ center PI ,.,." ""'"" r is 
                                               (p E B : dc,., p) Sri. 
                  II there can. be no milundent.uadiDI about what the me&rio...,. ... 
            ODe often apeak'  of the "open (or oIoIed) ball of OID_ "  ucI1'1diU r". 
            When one epeakI of an "open (or  oIoHd)  ball"  one II\I&Da  ....  os-a ('" 
            clOIed) baD of lOme center"  in the metric  .... and IIOIlle radiuI ,  > 0. 
            Bya "baD" is meant an opeD' ball or ..... bIIJ. If our ............  fa 
            ordinary  3-epaee B' then the precedinl  terrninololrit in MCOId with..,..,... 
            day Jancuace: an open baD in B' it the inaide of IIOID8 ephere while. ca.I 
           •     m ...... o .. ~ 
           ball It the iDIlde 01.,.. ..... t.opther wRb the point. on the ......  the 
           .... aDd rIdii 01 the baDe .,.. the eeaten aDd radii reepectinl7 01 the 
           ..... In the pIaae .. AD opeD ball •  the iDIicIe of lOme circle while a 
           .... ball. the iDIide 01 a ciNle topther  witll the point. on the cln1 .. In 
           ... meUio .... baIIa ....,  look eve ... like an ordinary  uball"  (of. 
           J'Ia. 7). 
                           .....,.  A ..................                      flI.pIaDe. 
                                   aiwa ... -I6I.,)e.:->o.,>ol. 
                  w. nca1l ... , if ."  e a, a <', .. tIae ~ ................ 
            "a.'lIthe_  (a, ') - 'a e a : a < • < 'I' 
            wbDe the.."........,  ........  a"'"  II the.-
                                           r-.'l-Iae.:a~a~'l .. 
                                                        a<a<' 
            aN equl __ , to the Iaequalllitl 
                                   a- a+' <a- a+r. <._ a+' 
                                             222 
            or 
                                                I  a+'I<"-a 
                     .                           a-,--                -,-,                               ' . 
            .........................           .......  1ImIhed ..... TIle aymbol ( ... ) ..........  . 
            .... ........ ... _ ....... pUr vi ...... iii R (_, wbich.dIe  ... Wq, 
            .,.." ..,. Tbe .... to be .... to (G, ') IIIauId alwaJII be .. fl'Olll .. COD-
            ...           .  . 
                                                                            12. 0 .... AND 0L08IID  8II'1'II     It 
           10 that. (a. b) is the opeD.  ball in the meVio apace R  with center  (a + b)/2 
           and radiUl (6 - a)/2.  Similarly [a. b) is the cloeed ball with the aame cen_ 
           and radiua. II PI E  R and r E  R, r > 0, then the open (or cloaed) ball in B 
           with center  PI and radiua r is <PI - r, PI + r)  (or lPt - r, PI + rD. 10 that 
           the open (cloeed) billa in B are Juat the open  (cloaed) intervall. 
                            "'1----r --_'~"_--r -----tal 
                            I                                  I                                  I 
                            1                                  I                                  1 
                        p.-r                                   PI                             p.+r 
                                   l'Iova  8.  Ball iD •  wlda aeatel' PI and radiUl r. 
            n.Jlraidora.        A aubaet 8  of a metric apace  E is opeA  if. for  each p E  8, 
           8  contaiua  lOme open ball of center  p. 
                  Int.uitively.  a aubaet. 8  of  the  metric  apace  B is open  if 8  containa 
            all  pointe  of  E  that  are  aufficiently  near  any  liven  point  of 8,  but  t.hia 
            property  can be .. ted preoiaely only by repeatiOl  the definition Juat liven. 
            Note that it. makea no IIeDIe to I&y that a aet 8 is open or not unleal 8 is a 
            IUbiet of lOme apecific metric apace B. 
            Propodcfora.  'or .. ,  metric Ipace B, 
                   (1)  '" __ /IJ .. ... 
                   (I)  "' __ B .. ... 
                   (3)  '" union 0/ .. ,  collIJction 0/ OJNR ...,.,.  0/ B .. OJNR 
                   (4)  the itaWlICCion 0/ a ftAtu AVtRlHw 0/ OJNR ...,.,.  0/ E ia opeA. 
                   The  proof  of  the  fint  item  is  trivial,  t.bouah perbapa  trioky  for 
            beginuen:  we bave to ahow that "for any p E  /IJ there is an open ball wch 
            t.hat. • . • ... a  atatement  that  is automatically  true  ainee there  is AD P wch 
            that  p E  flJ. The aecond  item  is equally  trivial;  indeed  any  ball in B is 
            contain8d  in B. Item  (3) is al80 clear. To prove  (4), let 8.,  ..•• 8. be open 
            aubaete of E and p E  8. f"\ •.. f"\ 8 •. For i .... 1, ... , A. each 8, is open, 10 
            there  exiate a real number  re > 0 auch that  the open  ball of center  p and 
             ndiua  re ia entirely  contained  in 8"  Then the  open  ball of center 'p and 
             radiua minlr.,  ••. , r.1  ia contained  in each 8 and  is contained  therefore 
                                                                              e 
             in 8. f"\ ...  "8 •. ThUl 8." ... "8. ia open. 
                   The word "open"  eo far occura in two contexte:  we have open balla 
             and open leta.  That no errore can ariae is a conaequenee of the followina 
             ~~                                   . 
              40      In.  M1I'I'IUO 8PA.CH 
              Propoeition.                1n Gntl metric apace, _  open bt.all ta _  open •• 
                      For let E be a metric space and comrider the open ball 8 of center  ". 
              and radius r. We have to show that if p E  8, then BOme open ball of center 
              p ill entirely  contained  in 8. Figure  9 gives the idea of the proof: if p E  8 
              then the open ball of center p and radius r - dCPt, p) ill contained  in 8. To 
              fill  in the detai1l  of the proof,  note  fim that  d(po, p)  < r einee p E  8, BO 
              that  r  -       d(pe, p) > 0  and  there  actually  exiItI  an open  ball  of center  p 
              and radius r - d(po, pl. If f ill in thilllatter  ball then d(p, f)  < r  - d(".,  p) 
              and therefore  d(p., f) ~ d(p., p) + d(p, f) < d(po, p) + (r - d(p., p» - r. 
              Thus f E 8 and the proof is complete. 
                                                   r  -   "(P •• ,,)_~.(/ 
                                                   Plovo 9. All opeD ball ill all opeD lit. 
                       A. a collleqUenC8 of the lut two pt'Opoaitiona we can ueert that the 
               open subeeta of E are preci8e1y the uniona of open balls of E, that ill, any 
               epen subeet ill such a union  fm fact it ill the union of aU the open bal.  it 
               contains)  and any such union ill an open set. 
                       The difference between (3)  and (4) in the fi.I'It propoeition  is to be 
               noted  seriously. Item  (4) ill no longer true if the word "finite"  ill dropped. 
               For  example,  CODIider in  r  the  open  ball,  with  center  the  origin 
                (0,0,  ... ,0)  and  radii 1, ~, U, 34, ... ; the  intenection  of  theee  open 
                bal. ill just  the origin itaelf, a let which ill cleariy not open. 
                Dtr/in.tfon.             A subeet  8 of a  metric  apace E il clotetl il ite complement 
               eB (that ii, all pointe in E which are not in 8) iI open. 
                                                    Ploua 10. ()peD Uld cIoIed llta in P. 
                                                                                       12.  0 .... 4JfD eLOIIID  ...             41 
                    As before, to avoid trouble we should ahow that a cloeed ball is a clClIed 
             set. Here are the statement and proof, quite analOlOUB to what was done 
                                    11 illUlltrateB the ar;ument. 
             above. Figure 
             Propoaltfoft,            I,. Oftll mdric .,ace, G cloaed ball it G ...., .... 
                    Let 8 be the closed ball of center PI E B and radius r aDd let p E e8. 
             Then d(".,  p) > r, eo d("." p)  - r > 0 and we can CODIider the opea ball 
             of center p and radiUII d(".,  p) - r. For any point f in the latter opeD ball 
             we have d(p, q) < d(p., p)  - r, eo that 
                      d(Po, q) - d{J1o, q) + d(q, p) - d(p, f) ~ d(p., p) - d(p, t> > r. 
             ThUll the open ball of center p and radius d(p., p)  - r i. entirel1 eontalned 
             in es, eo that es is open. Tbus 8 ill cloeed. 
                                                                                            i(Jle,,,)  -   r 
                                              FJGtlUI n. A cto.d ball ill a cloled lilt. 
                     Analogous to the first proposition on open .. we have the followiDc 
              result.                                                                             . 
              Propoatfoft.             For Oftll metric Ipoce  H, 
                     (1)  Ute aubld  E ia cloI«I 
                     (I)  Ute IUbaet Il1 ia cloaed 
                     (8)  Ute i"""aecMn 01 emil coll«:tiorI 0/"'" ......  0111 it ... 
                     (of)  Ute Uftion 01 G ft,f.- "",..".,.  oJ ..., ...",.  oJ Bit ..... 
                     TbiI  NIUlt fo1lcnn bnmediately from the analopat  propoIitioD for 
              open eubaetB. For B and Il1 are the complement. of f4 and 11 reapeotiYeIy, 
              which are open, eo that 11 and Il1 are cloIed. P .....  (3) and (4) ,......  fl'Olll 
              the fact that the eomplemeot of an intenectlon  is • UDion, and ...... 
              (bottom EuitcI8.,  pap 8). For (3), we note that  the  complemeDt of the 
              intenection  of any  collection of cloIed au'" of E is the union of the 
            compIementa of these clOled au ..... , that is the union of certain open leta, 
            which is open. For (4), note that the complement of the union of a finite 
            number  of cloeed subeeta is the interaection  of the  complements  of this 
            finite number of clOled seta, that  is the intersection  of a finite number  of 
            open leta,  which is open. 
                   II  p, t  are  dlatinot  point.  01 the  metric  apace B then  there  are  balla 
            (elther open or clOHCl) contalnlnlone  point but not the other, for  example 
            any ball (either open or ciOled) centered at p or q and of radius I .. than 
            cI{p, q). Tbus any point is the intenection  01 all the closed ball.  containinl 
            it,  provilll  (by  (3) above)  that  a  point  is a clOled set.  By  (4), any finite 
             __ oJ a tndric IJHIC' iI cloa«I. 
                   The complement of an open ball is a closed set, &8 i8 the closed ball of 
             the .me center and radius, 80 again by  (3) the intel'8eCtion of these  two 
             seta is clOled. Thus for any PI E  E and any  r > 0, the "8phere of center Po 
             and  radius  r",  that  is, the  set  (s E  E : d(p., p) ... r}, is closed. 
                    It is easy to  live  examples of subsets  of a  metric  space  which are 
             neither open nor closed. For example, let E = ft, let a, b E ft, a < b, and 
             oonaider the "balf-open interval" 
                                              [o,b)- (zER:aSs<b). 
             Then (a, b) containa the point a but no open ball having center a, 80 (a, b) 
             is not open. Similarly, e[a, b) containa the point b but no open ball havinl 
             oenter b, 10 e(a, b) is not open. Tbus [a, b) is neither open nor clOlled. 
                    For any" - 1,2,3,  ...  and any  0 E  R,  the  aubset  of E- liven  by 
                                                l(sl,  ... ,:c.) E E- : Sl> ot 
             ill open. For let p - (:ct,:ct, .•• ,:c.) be in this lubset  and consider the open 
             ball of center  p and  radius SI - O.  II q -                     (YI,  Y"  ..• ,Y .. )  is in  the  latter 
              ball, then 
                      lSI -    YII S V(:l:l - Yu' + ... + (:c,. - tI .. )''''  d(p, q)  <:I:I - a, 
              80  til  -   :l:a -  (:l:a - Ya) ~ :l:a -lSI  - YII > :1:1  -          (XI  -   a)  ... a,  80  that  the 
              point  q is in the set  (:l:a, .•• ,:c,.) Eli:":  :1:1 > a}.  Hence this  latter  set  is 
              open. Similarly  the set  (:l:a, •• • ,:c,.) E  E- : :1:1  <  a}  i. open,  and  for any 
              • -   1,2,  ... , '"  the leta 
                      «ZI, •. . ,:c,.) E  E- : Zf> 01              and      «Za, ... , z .. ) Eli:":  Zf < al 
              are open. Consequently their complement. 
                      «:ct,  ••• , z..) Eli:":  s. S CIt           and      ((Zl, ••• , s .. ) E  E"  : Zf ~ a} 
              areao.ad. 
                                                                                ., ........... . 
                  u .........................  e ..... < ..... .:: .........  < ... 
            then dae .. of polafll                                                                           -
                         « • ., 0  .. ,  .., e .. : ~ <., < II. for each i-I, .. 0, til 
            ia ca1led &0. ... ..,.., ita II- aad the .. of poin. 
                          1< • ., ... , -.> ell-:  ~:s; .. :s; .. for eaoh i-I, .. 0, til 
            ia ca1lecl a ... ..,.,.,.,  ita "0 (Thia poeraIlHa the UIUAl notion of opea 
            and cloeed interval in R - ,810)  Atl ... (or doted) i,.",.,.,  in B- ia CIA open 
            (or"',  ,...,."...,.,,,)  __ For IUOh a let it the latenectioD  of the 2ft 
            IUbeete PVeD by the aeparate eoaditiODl 8, < .1, 0  0  0, •                         < .. , ". > .1, 0  0  0, 
            b. >..  (or 8,:s; • ., 0 0  0 ,  •         :S; .. ,  ". ~ • .,  0  0  0, .. ~ .. )   ADd  theee latter 
            1UtJeet.  are aU opeD  (or cloeed), heace 10 is their latenection. 
                                                ..  --
                                                 ..  -- ..                           .. 
                                              l'Iauu  11. A. obecIlDt.erYal1D ... 
             lhtIbdefoA.  A IUbM S of a metric apace E is bou,.".,  if it it contaiaecl 
             in lOme ball. 
                    In this definition the ballla  question may be either open or cloeed, for 
             any open ball it contained in a cloeed baH (for example the cloeed ball of 
             the IAIDe  center aad radiua) and any clOl8Cl ball is contained in &0. open 
             ball (for example the open ball of the eame center and &0.1 Jarpi' radiua). 
              Aa &0. example of a boUDded let, coD8ider the open and cloeed intervale in 
             .. cliaoUlled above; tbeIe are aU boUDded IIinoe the let 
                            «.., .. 0, .. ) ell- : ~:s; .. :s; II. for each i -1, "0, til 
             is contaiaecl in the cloeed ball of center (a., 0 . 0,.)  ADd radius of magni-
              tude  V' (fI, - -.)1 + 0  0  0  + (b. - c.)'o 
          44    m. MIlTIIJO IIPA01l8 
               If 8 is a bounded  subset  of the metric space E then  8 is contained  in 
          some ball (either open or closed) with center Po, where Po is «my point of E. 
          For since 8 is contained  in IIOme ball, say the closed ball of center  PI and 
          radiua r, then 8 is also contained  in the closed hall of center Po and radiue 
        . , + d<Po, pt}. This makes obvioua the fact that  the union of a finite number 
          of bounded  subsetAI of E is bounded. 
                It is clear from the definition that a subset of R ie bounded if and only 
          if it is both bounded  from above and bounded  from below. 
            .   . 
          Prop03Ltfon.  A nonmtpty  cloaed BUb_ of R, if it ia bounded from above, 
          Ma a ".eateat  element and if it ia bounded from below Ma a leaat element. 
                Let 8 be a nonempty  subset of R and suppose, for definitenell,  that 8 
          ie bounded from above  (the  proof being almost  the same if 8 is bounded 
          from below). Let a -= I.u.h. 8. If a e 8, then  a E e8 and since e8 i8 open 
          there  exiets a number  E > 0 such that  the open  ball in R of center  a and 
          radius E is contained  in e8. This means that no element of 8 ie greater than 
           a-E. Therefore, a - E i8 an upper bound for 8, contrary  to the 888Umption 
           a -l.u.b.  8. We conclude that a E  8, as was to be shown. 
                                                            f S.  CONVERGENT  SEQUENCES. 
                Let  Pt, Pt, PI, ...  be a  sequence  of poiute  in  the  metric  space  E.  It 
           may happen that as we go out in the sequence the points of the sequence 
           "get arbitrarily  close to" IIOme point p of E. This i8 illuatrated  in Figure  13, 
           where the various terms  of the sequence. at first oscillate irregularly,  then 
           proceed to get closer and closer to p, in fact "gang up on" p, or "get arbi-
           trarily  close to" p. The purpose of the following definition is to give some 
           precise Bellle  to the intuitive  words "get arbitrarily  eloee to". 
                                                                                                   . 
                                                             .                                     "1 
                                                             PI 
                           • 
          .                PI      . 
          PI                       ". 
                              FJoUlUl 13. A eODvergent eequenee of points in 8'. 
                                                                    ,3. COllvmlOaNT  BIIQUIINCIIII     ... 
          Dejinition.       Let  Ph Pt, PI, . ..  be  a  sequence  of  pointe  in  the  metric 
          space E. A point  pEE is called a limit of the sequence  Pl, PI, PI, ••.  if, 
          liven  any  real  number  e > 0,  there  is  a  positive  integer  N  such  that 
          d(p, p,,) < • whenever  n > N.  II the  sequence  PI, PI, PI, •••  baa a  limit., 
          we call the sequence conHrgent, and  if p is a limit  of the sequence we I&)' 
          that tAe aequenu contJerfe. 10 p. 
                Let us make a few observations  concerning this  definition.  The main 
          one is that liven any e > 0 there existe a positive integer N having a certain 
          property  involving e. Thus N uaually depends on e, and it. would have been 
          more precise to write N(e)  instead  of N.  However the extra  precision ob-
          tained  by  writing  N(e)  in.te&d  of  N  I't'Jlulte in  unnec888&l'y not.&ticmal 
          confusion, 80 from now on we just tacitly  und8l'lltand that N depends on e 
          and  stick  to our  shorter  notation.  Note  that  we do  not  even  care  wbat. 
          specific N goes with  each  e > 0, the important  thing  being that  for each 
          e > 0 there existe 30mB N  with  the desired  property;  if for lOIIle e > 0  we 
          have a certain  N  with  the desired  property,  then  any  larpr  N  would do 
          equally well for our liven  •. Thus in deciding whether or not a sequence of 
          points  is convergent,  only the terms far out count;  that  is, if we obtain  a 
          new sequence by lopping off the fil'llt few terms of our original sequence, the 
           two sequences we have are either  both  convergent  (with the _me limits) 
           or both not converpnt. 
                Another observation  on the definition of limit and convergence it that 
           these  concepts  are  always  relative  to some specific metric  space  E. ThUl 
          it might  happen  that  for the liven  sequence of pointe  in  B, Pt, PI, PI, •.. , 
           the  condition  in  the  definition  of limit  holds  for a  certain  point  p of B', 
           where E' i. some metric apace of which B it a aubepace; the sequence would 
           then  be convergent  in E', but we could not call it convergent  in B unleaa 
           we knew that  p E  B. Thus  in using the notion  of convergence a epecific 
           metric  space  must  be borne  in  mind.  A. an easy example,  the  sequence 
           3,3.1,3.14,3.141,3.1415,3.14159,             •..  converges  in  R  (to  the  limit  1f), 
           but  not  in the subspace  e 11f} of R. 
                 In speaking' informally of a convergent sequence of points Pl, PI, PI, •.. 
           in a  metric  space  E, one often  says  that  uthe  points  of the sequence  set 
           clOier and  cloeer to  the  limit",  but  thie  need  not  be literally  tNe.  For 
           example, u  we move along in the sequence the pointe of the sequence may 
           at fil'llt set nearer and nearer to the limit, then move somewhat away, then 
           get nearer  and  nearer  again,  then  move eomewbat  away,  etc. Thua  while 
           the terms of the sequence of points in R 
                                              1, ~, )i, J.(, U, ... 
           do get closer and r.1oser at each .tage to the limit sero, this is not litenlly 
           true  of the convergent  sequence 
                                          I, ~, ~,U,~, M, J1I, .... 
           46    m.lI ...... c ....... 
           'l1le pointa of & converpnt  IeqU811C8 may &leo happen to be all equaU, near 
           the limit, since for any pEE, the lequence 
                                                     p,p,p,  ... 
           coaverpa  to p. 
           PrGIJOfJtlon.  A .......  "" PIt PI, •••  oJ pH""  in G mtCric .,.,.  II AaI 
           ., ,....,  .... limiL 
                 For IUppoll8  that  p, fEB are both limita of the eequence. For  any 
           e > 0  there  are  positive  inteprl  N, N' auch that  d(p, Pa)  < • if n > N 
           and d("  Pa)  < e if n > N. If we chooee an integer  n > max IN, N'l we 
                                              '
           mUlt bave d(p, p.) < .. d(f, p.)  < e, 10 that 
                                d(p, f)  S d(p, p.) + d(p.,  ,) < e + • - 2 .. 
           If tl(p, f)  ,. 0 we _       & contradiction  by chooeing • S d(p, ,)/2.  Therefore 
           we mUlt have tl(p, f) - 0, 10 tbat p - f. 
                 Tbua & converpnt  lequeDOfl hu & unique limit, and it makelMD18  to 
           Ipeak of 1M limit of & converpnt  lequence. A lequeBCe which ie not con-
            v.pot of COWIe hu no limit. 
                  'l1le ltatement tbat  the IeqUeIlC8  of pointa Pat "., PI, .••  (in & metric 
            Ipue B) converpa  to the point p (&110 in B) II written  concilely .. 
                                                      lim".  - p. 
                                                      -
                  For &  ftODCOnverpnt IIqUeDOe  Pa, PI, PI, . ••  of  point. in  &  metric 
            IpMe B the exp...wn 11m p. .. meaninl1-.  In this cue we &110 .,. that 
                                           -
            lim p. "do. not exiIt". 
            -If Ga, a., CII, •••  ie & lequeDOe (01 any  kind of object8)  and if na. tit, 
            lie, •••  it  &  atrictly  increuina  lequence  of  poIitive  intege ...  (that  ie, 
            "" "" na, .•.  are  positive  inteprl  and  na < na < lit < ... )  &hen  the 
            IeClU8llC8 "-t, ..... a".,  •••  ie  called &  ~ of the  leClueDCe Ga,", 
            ....... 
            ..........  elon.    An,  ~ oJ G co,.".,.,.,.,  aequence oJ poiftII  in  G 
            tnIfric IJNIC4I c:tmM'fa 10 1M .... limit. 
                  For  let  lim p. - p  and  let  na. tit, na, . ..  be  &  strictly  increuinl 
                              .-
            IeClU8llC8 of positive inteprl.  Given any e > 0 there is a positive intepr  N 
            lUCIa that  c1(p,,,.) < e whenever n > N.  Since "- t! m  for  all  positive 
            In .....  WI,  we  have  c1(p, p..)  < • whenever m > N.  TbII  meana  -*,t. 
            lim ,.. - p, wblob II wbat  we wanted to sbow. [Note that  m in the 1Ut 
            -
             fGImuIa •  Juat &  "dWD1D7 variable",  .. wu n in the expNMion lim p..] 
                                                                                                     -
                                              18. OONyp·PRQVU"        .., 
           The  PrecediDl reault pnerali .. the  fact  that  if a  finite number of 
       tenns are lopped off the beginning of a COIlv8l'lent eequence, the ..... ting 
       sequence conv8l'les to the aame limit. 
           Call a eequence of pointe PI, PI, PIt • ••  in a  metric apace botmdefl if 
       the set  of pointe  (PI, PI, PI, ... J Ie bounded.  It it euy to ahow that  any 
       convel'l811t 88qU8llCe of pointe in a metric apace Ie bounded: If the lIq\lellce 
       PI, PI, PI, .••  converpl  to  the  point  P, plok any  • > 0 and  then  find a 
       poeitive  integer  N  luch  that  tl(p, p.)  <.  whenever  ,,> N.  Then 
        (PI, Pt, PI, ... , ie contained  in the closed ball of center P and radiue 
                      max (I, tl(p, P.)', tl(P, PI>, ... , tl(P, PH)J. 
           We recall that  a  closed lubset  of a  metric space  was defined as the 
       complement of an open lubset. Thue the knowledge of all the closed subaete 
       of a metric space Ie equiValent to the knowledge of aU the open subsets.  It 
       ie also true  that  the knowledge of aU the open subsets of a  metric  space 
       determines which eeqU811Cell of pointe are converg811t, and to which limits. 
       For  it ie immediate  from the  definitions that  the sequence PI, PI, PI, ... 
       conveJ'1e8 to the limit' P if and only if, for any open set  U that contains the 
       point  p, there exiata a positive integer N such that  for any integer"  > N 
       we have p. E U. The next result will tell ue that knowledge of all the con-
        vel'lent  sequencea of points in the metric space, together with their limits, 
        determines  the  closed subaeta of the  metric  lpace.  Thue  any  ltatement 
        concerning the open IUbeets of a metric apace can be tranel&ted into a ltate-
        ment  concerniDl the cloeed subeeta, which itaelf can  be  tr&nsl&ted into 
        another  ltatement  concernin& converpnt  eeqU8llCeII of pointe  and  their 
        limite. Thua  there  are  three  languages  capable of making eIII8lltially the 
        eame ltatemente:  the languap of open sets, that of closed sets, and that of 
        convergent  sequencea. AJJ one would expect, however, limple  statemente 
        in one language may translate  into complicated statemente  in another.  We 
        eha11 therefore UI8 all three  languages elmultaneouely, or rather  a common 
        language including all three,  always  striving  for  simplicity  (as  opposed 
        to  purity I)  of  expreaaion. 
        Theorem.   La 8 be a ""'Nt oJ 1M metric IpGCe E. T"'"  8 if cloNtl if aM 
        only i/, ~ PI, Pt, PI, ... if a uquenee 01 poi"" oj 8 t4at if COfWergen.t 
        mE, tIHJ 1uwe               lim p.E8. 
                                    -
            There are two parts  to the proof. First  suppose that  8 is closed and 
        that Plo Pt, PI, . •• ie a sequence of points of 8 that convel'lee to a point  p 
        of E. We muat show that  P E 8. If thie is not 10, we have p E  e8.  Since 
        e8 Ie OP811, there Ie lOme I  > 0 such that e8 contains the entire open ball 
        of  center  p  and  radiua  I.  Thua  if  N  ie  &  poeitive  integer  such  that 
        tl(p, p.)  < e whenever"  > N, we have p. E e8 whenever"  > N, & contra-
        diction. Thie aWl that p E 8 and provea the "only if" part of the theorem. 
              48      m.MmTlUCIIPACilII 
                     To prove the  "if"  part,  suppose 8 C E is not closed. Then  e8 is not 
              open, and  there  exists a point 'P E e8 such that  any open ball of center 'P 
              contains points of 8. Hence for each positive integer n we ean choose 'P .. E  8 
              such that  d(p, 'P .. ) < l/n.  Then  lim 'P .. .. 'P,  with  each  p. E 8 and  'P C! 8. 
                                                                     -
              This shoWl that  if the  hypothesis  on convergent  sequences  holds, then  8 
              must  be closed, completing  the  proof of the  "if"  part,  and  hence  of the 
              whole theorem. 
                      The metric  space R has special properties  that  are not shared  by all 
              metric  spaces:  its  elements  can  be  added  and  multiplied,  and  they  are 
              ordered.  For want  of a better  place, we insert  here the relevant  properties 
              of sequences of real numbers. 
              PropotJidon.               1/ aI, CIt, /Ja, • ••  and  b , ba, ba,  •••  o.re convergent aequence. 
                                                                               l
              0/ rBCJlnumber8, tlJ'WI. limits a tmd b respectively, Uatm 
                                                             lim (a" + b,,) .... a + b 
                                                             -
                                                             lim (a"  -       b .. )  =  a  -   b 
                                                             -
                                                             lim a"b,.               .... lib 
                                                             -
              ., in CfJ86 b tmd eoc1a b.. are 1'IOI'IIe1'0, 
                                                                   lim  a"            0 
                                                                   ..- b,;'"- l)' 
                       We prove each part  separately.  Recall  that  for  z, '1/ E ft,  d(z,7I) -
                Iz - 711. For the first part,  given  I> 0 we al80 have  1/2> 0,80  that  we 
               ean find a positive integer  N I such  that  I a - a" I < ./2 whenever n > N 1 
               and we can also find a positive integer N, such that  Ib - b .. 1 < 1/2 when-
               ever n > NI• If we set N = max (NI' N.},  then  whenever n > N we have 
                             I (a + b) - (a"  + b,,) 1 ... 1 (0 -                a,,) + (b - b,,) I 
                                                                                                             I!       1 
                                                                  ~ la - a,,1+lb - b,.1 <'2+'2  - f. 
               This  proves the tint part. 
                       The second part, about subtraction,  can be proved in a similar manner. 
               M a matter of fact, a few changes of sign in the above proof win prove the 
               result lor subtraction.  Here i. an alternate proof: By the third  part  (which 
               is proved  in  the  next  parapaph),  obeemnl  that  the  sequence  -I, -1, 
              . -1, ...  convergee to  -1, we have lim (-b,,)  -                                     -b, 10 by the fil'lt part 
                                                                              -
                               lim (0,. - b .. ) = lim  (0,. + (-b,.»  -lim 0,. + lim (-b .. ) 
                              .......                      ...-.co                            ..... ... 
                                                             13. CON ..... rr IIIIQUDC8I     ... 
              To prove the third paR we Itart with the fact that converpDtlM!Cl'llDeel 
         are  bound8!i to 1ft a number  AI E R lOCh that  1 .. 1 < AI and I'"  < AI 
         for all poeitive inteprl  n. Clearly M > O. Since a clOl8d baU it a clOled lit, 
         the pncediDi  theorem impli.  101, 161 S M.  Given  aD7  • > 0  we ... 
         have ./2M > 0, 10 there exietI a poeitive intepl'  N such that  10 - .. I < 
         ./2M  and  16 - 6.1 <.I2M  whenever ft > N.  Hence  for  aDY  intepr 
         ft >Nwehave 
            lab - ,.. ... I-IGb - cab. + cab. - ,..6.I-lo(b  - b.) + 6.(0 - ,..), 
                          Slol·lb-""+I"'I·lo-             .. I<AI'~ +AI·W-" 
         This provel  the third  part. 
               To prove the laat  paR,  about  division,  &rat coDlider the apeoial .. 
         where .. - 1 for all ft.  We want to show that 1/'" converpa  to l/b, that is 
         tbat 
                                      T--;;;;--        b· 
                                       1      1 I     '~I~I 
                                      1
         is tunall if n is larp.  The numerator  is clear1ylllll8ll if ft is larp,  but we allO 
         need to bave the  1"'1 in the denominator  bounded away from aero, or the 
         total  fraction may not be amaIl. The latter  objective is euily accompliIhed 
          by taking n 10 large that  16 - 6.1 < ''''/2. The formal detaila of the proof 
          that  lim 1/'" - lib we give .. folio ... : 
                -
          Given.  > 0, chooee a positive intepl'  N lOch that if ft > N then 
                                   Ib- ... ,<min{¥, Ib! .. }. 
          Then if ft >  N we have 
                     1"'1-1" - (b -"')1 ~ Ibl-'"  -"I >Ibl-l&l-l&l. 
          10 that 
                                ilt  II?II.~                     If'llt 
                              l
                               T --;;;;- -         · ..  <  ,.,. (111) - .. 
          ThtI prov.  that  lim 1/'" - l/b;  To com.,.. the proof of the ... part 
                   .           -
          01 the propoeition we UI8  the third pan topther  with this Jut .-It • 
          fol1owa: 
             Ie      m ......... C ... CD 
                     Note  the apecial CMeI  of the lut propoeition when one or the other 
             of the Bequencee 01, CIt, CIt, •••  or b , bt, bt, . ..  is constant: 
                                                                     l
                                lim (a. + b) - lim a. + b,  lim ab. ... a lim b .. , etc . 
                                .. -                    -                     .. -
                     The next very eMf...wt  exp ..... the compatibility  of converpnce 
             of MqUeDCeI  of real numben  with order. 
              Propoaldoft,             1/ ai, CIt, CIa,  •••  c&nd ha, bt, ha,  •••  are converpn'  ~ 
             0/ real number., vitA _ii, fI c&nd b ,..".aiNly,  ond if a. ~ b., /01' aU n. U&eR 
              fI S b. 
                     For  b - a - lim b,. - lim a. - lim (b,. - a.). and  since each b .. - a. 
                                           .. -           .. -           .. -
              ia nonneptive  the theorem implies that  the limit also is nonneptive.  the 
              let  (z E B : z ~ 0) heiDi clo.ed. 
              DttfbUtloft,           A MqueDOe  of  reU numbenl  ai, CIt. CIa. •••  is ifu:r...m, if 
              .. S CIt ~ CIa S  ...• ~ if CIt ~ CIt ~ CIa ~ ••• , and monoConic if it. is 
              aU. inCl'8Uiq or decreuiq. 
                     Suppoee flrat that  fll,  0.. CIa.  •••  ia •  bounded  increaeiDg Mquence  of 
              reU numben.  We IhaIl prove  that  the sequence  converges to the  limit 
              fI  -  l.u.b.  loa, fIt, ......  ).  We have  fI ~ a. for all n. by the  definition  of 
              upper  bound.  For any  e > 0 we have  fI - e < 0,  80  by  the  definition of 
              leut upper bound then ia • poeitive intepr  N lOch t.hat ON > 0  - .. Since 
              the Mquence  ia increuin&,  it. foUowa that. if n > N then a. > fI - e, 80 t.hat. 
                                       fI-e<o.SfI<fI+e,                           or  10-0.1<  •. 
               Thua the eequence converps  to fJ. F.entially  the 8Iol1le proof abowa that 
               a  bounded decreuiDi  sequence of real  numbers converges; we have only 
               to replace I.u.b. by ,.I.b.  and change the sense of lOme of the inequalities. 
               Or we can apply  the part already  proved  to let the  convergence of the 
               increuinl  sequence  -01.  -CIt,  -CIa •••• , which implies the convergence of 
               ............. 
                      ExAM."..  The lut reaul$ Ilv. an easy proof that if 0 E  B.lol < 1. 
               then 
                                                                   lim fI"  -     O. 
                                                                   -
                       Pint note that  1"1-1 fI I". 80 that we may BUppoee that a ~ O. Then 
               tile IeqU8DCe fl ...... ,...  • •• ia decreuiDi.  since a" - 0,,+1 -                             a"(l  - a) ~ O. 
                                                                            I"~ 11 
          The terms of the lequence are all nollll8Ptive,  10 the aequence is bounded, 
          hence converpnt.  Let lim a" ... :1:.  Then 
                                      -
                        a:J: =  a lim art ==  lim (a • art) -   lim a,,+l -   lim a" .... :1:. 
                                  ........                      .....         .... 
          Since a:J: -  ., we have (a - l)z - 0, 10 •  -. O. 
                AJj a CODlequence of what we have Juat shown, if G E  a,lGI > 1, then 
                                I
          the  sequence  G, G , ai, at, ...  is  unbounded.  (Another  proof  of  thia  fact 
          is indicated  in Problem  11, Chapter  II.) 
                                                                           I'.  COMPLETENESS. 
                The definition of convergence of a sequence of pointe in a metric apace 
          enables ua 
                        to verify the convergence of a liven sequence only if the limit is 
          known. It is desirable to be able to state that a liven sequence is convergent 
          without  actually  having to find the limit. We can already do this in certain 
          eaaeB,  for the last proposition  of the previous section state. bt a bounded 
          monotonic  sequence  of real numbers  is alwayB converpnt.  However  we 
          need a more pneral  "inner"  criterion  for the convergence of a sequence of 
          pointe in a metric apace. For this reason we introduce  below the concept of 
           "Cauohy  sequence",  a sequence of pointe  in a metrio  apace that  .tiBies 
          a certain  property depending only on the terms of the sequence. It will tum 
           out that all convergent  sequenoea are Cauchy  aequenoea and that,  at least 
           for  certain  important  metric  spaces,  any  Cauchy  sequence is convergent. 
           Thus we ahall often be able to state that a sequence is convergent  without 
           having  to determine  the limit.  We very  often  are  not at all interested  in 
           computing  the limit  of a sequence  but rather  in verifying  that  the  limit 
           po88l!11es certain  properties,  and once it is known that the limit existe auch 
           properties  can often be inferred directly  from the sequence. 
           D~,,'dcm.  A Hquence  of pointe  PI, Pt, Pa, ...  in a  metrio  apace  is a 
           Ca.y aequerw if, liven any real number.  > 0, there is a positive integer 
           N such that d(p,., p..)  < • whenever n, tn > N. 
                 The number  N in the definition  above  of course depends  on  •. The 
           important  point  is that  liven  CJRy  t  > 0  there  exiBte aotM  N  with  the 
           desired property. 
           Pro""..don.         A ~ ~ oJ poi"" in G metric apcace ia G CcaucI&1I 
           aequerw. 
                 For  if PI, Pt,,., ...  conv_  to  P  then  for  any  • > 0  th.-e  II an 
           integer  N  such  that  d(p, p,,) < ./2  whenever  R > N. Hence  if R, tn > N 
           we have            d(p,., p.) S d(p", p) + d(p, Pa)  < i + i == e. 
          5J   DI.  M1IITRIO IPACBII 
               However, not every Cauchy sequence is convergent.  For example the 
          sequence  1,~,~, U, U, ...  is  a  Cauchy  sequence  in  the  metric 
          apace E =  R - (01 (the complement of (01 in R), but it is not convergent 
          in B. More generally, if we take .ny sequence of points in •  metric apace 
          which converges to a limit  which is.not  one of the terms of the sequence 
          and tben delete the limit from the metric apace, we get a Cauchy sequence 
          which is not convergent. 
               The following two  easy  propositions  give known  properties  of con-
          vergent  sequences that generalise to Cauchy sequences. The tint proposi-
          tion is trivial 80 the proof is omitted. 
                For if the sequence Ie Pl, PI, PI, •••  and  I  i. any positive number and 
          N an intepr IUOh that tI(p., P.)  < I if fa, '" > N. theD for any fixed '" > N 
          the entire  seqUeDce Ie contained  in the closed ball of center p. and radius 
                             max (tI(p.. N. tI(p.. pi) ••••• tI(p.. pII), .1. 
          Pro".,..tlon.       A Cauchyaequmce Uaat Jug CI ~, ~ if itnlf 
          ~. 
                Let Pl, PI, PI, •••  be the Cauchy sequence, p the limit of a convergent 
          aubaequence. For  • > 0, let N be nch that  tI(p., p.) < ./2 if ft, '" > N. 
          Fix an integer m > N 80 that p. is in the convergent  nbaequence  and 80 
          far out that tI(P, p.)  < ./2. Then for" > N we have 
                                                                     •  • 
                           tI(P, p.)  S tI(P. P.) + tI(p., p.)  < 2' + 2' - .. 
          D.n'tlon.         A metric  apace E is comp"  if every  Cauchy  sequence  of 
          points of B converges to a point of B. 
                It will be proved.hortly  that B- Ie complete. Other usefulexampl.  of 
           complete metric apaceII  will appear  later. The  lollowina propolition  gives 
           us infinitely  more examples. 
           P.."".ttlon.       A cloaetIlUbteC 01 CI complete metric .. if II COMplete meCrie 
           8pGCe. 
                The nbeet is of COWBe considered to be a nbapace,  80 that a Cauchy 
           sequence in the nbeet  is a fortiori  one in the ori&inal metrie  apace. The 
           result is an immediate  consequence of the theorem of the Jut aection. 
                                                                                     ... ~ . 
                 Let  a" fII, ....  ....  be a  Cauchy  eequence of ... Dum"'.  W. __ 
           thow  that  ~ leqUence con'N'PI  to a  ... Dumber. CoaIld.  the.-
               8 - Is E R : :r: ~ a. for an iDfinite Dumber of poIitive  in ...... J. 
           Since the Cauchy eequence is bounded, 8 it nonempty  and bounded  fIOIIl 
           above. Therefore a - 1.u.b. 8 exists. We proceed to prove that ...........  . 
           converpe  to  a.  Given  any  • > 0 choose a  poIitive  in .... N such  ~ 
            Ia. - ... 1 < ./2 if ", m > N. Since a -I.u.b.  8 we have _ +./2 E 8, but 
           a  -  ./2 E 8. ThiB means that for only a finite Dumber of poIitive in ..... 
           •  is it true  that  a + ./2 ~ a.., but  we have  a - ./2 ~ .. for an inllnite 
           number  of  ••  Hence  we  can find a apecifio intepr  ttl > N  IUoh th&t 
           a + ./2 > ... and  a - ./2 ~ ... , so  that  I_ - ... 1 ~ 1/2. Thftore  if 
           ,,> N  we have 
                              I- - .. 1-1 (a - a..) + ( .. - 0.)1                   •  • 
                                                ~I- - ... 1+1 ... -a.1<2+2-" 
           This provea that ai, CIt, .......  conv_ to Go 
                  For simplicity of notation  let "  - 3 j the proof for any •  will be _-
            tially  the ame.  We have  to show  that  a  Cauchy  MqUfll108  PI,'" Pat ••• 
            of  pointa  of  Ii- has a  limit.  Let  PI -              (SI, WI, IJ),  PI -    <-.,., -.), ,,-
            (:r:a, Ya, .. ),  etc. Given  • > 0  there  exiata a  poeitive  in .... N  lUCIa that 
            d(p., p.)  < • if., '" > N. Since 
                             d(,., Pa)  -     V (s. - :r:.)' + (r. - ,..). + ( .. - ...,. 
                                          ~ Is. - :r:.1, I,. - .. I, I~ - .. , 
            we  have  1s.-:r:..I, 1,.-,.1,1 .. - .. 1<'  whenever  .,.>N.  ThiI 
            meaaw that  each  of  the  sequence.  Sa, -. -. ••• , 'It fI, fa. ••• ,  .......... 
            .. , • ..  it a  Cauchy  IIqU8IlC8  in  R.  B7 the theoNIn .... I8qUtIIOII  Ale 
            converpnt,  and  we ,a.ote  their  Umita hT s, ,,' NlJ*livel7. We ... 
            pIOYe  lIIat  PI, ,.,,.,  • ••  convera- to the poiDt ,  -                 (s, "  .). Te cia ..., 
            pven • > Q choose N auch that for any intcw .. > N we haft  Is - Sel, 
            I. - ,.1, I. - .. I < ./'\IT.  Then for .. > N we bave 
                               d(p, ,.) - v'(s - .. 51 + (J - ,.5' + (. - .,. 
                                               -,..       ~  ~ 
                                           <-VT+T+T-" 
            '11lia proves  that lim ,. - p. 
                                    -
         "    III.  METRIC  BnCEI! 
                                                                 ,5.  COMPACTNESS. 
         Definition.    A subset  8 of a metric space E is compact if, whenever  8 is 
         contained  in the union of a collection of open subsets  of E, then  8 is con-
         tained  in the union of a finite number  of these open subsets. 
            .  Clearly any finite IUb8et of a metric  apace is compact.  Unfortunately 
         we have  to wait  before we can  give a I .. trivial  example  of a  compact 
         IUbaet of a metric space. An example of a noncompact  subset  of a metric 
         lpace  ii, however, easy to give:  the open interval  (0,1)  is not a compact 
         IUbeet of the  metric  space  R, lince  (0, 1) iI contained  in the  union  of all 
         open lubsete  of R of the form (1/",  I), where"  is a positive integer, but iI 
         not contained  in the union of any finite number  of these open IUbeete. It 
         will be seen 88 we go along that compactn .. is a property  related  to com-
               .. , but much stronger. 
         pleten 
              The definition  just given of a compact subset  of a metric space can be 
         applied to E itself:  the  metric  apace E is called compact if it is a compact 
         lubeet  of itself. This  means that  whenever E is the union of a collection of 
         open subsets,  it  is  the  union  of  lOme finite  subcollection  of  these  open 
         subeete. 
              Let 8 be an arbitrary  subset of a metric space E. When we consider 8 
         88 a IUbspace of E, an open ball in 8 is simply the set of pointe in 8 of an 
         open ball in E whose center  is in S, that  is the intersection  with  S of an 
         open ball  in E whose center  is in S. Thus  the open subsets  of the  metric 
         space S are preciaely the  intersections  with  8  of the  open  subseta  of E. 
          Hence S iI a compact subset of E if and only if the metric space 8 is com-
          pact. 
              One example of a compact  metric  space  will give us many  more, by 
          me&nl of the following reault. 
          ProJHMition.  A"y cloted ..w.t 0/ CI compact metric .pace  it compact. 
               For let the closed lubset  S of the compact  metric space E be contained 
          in  the  union  of a  collection  of open  lubseta  of E,  say  8 C  U  U"  where 
                                                                           iEI 
          each U, is an open subaet of E, ,ranging  over an indexing family 1. Then 
          E C (U U,) U e8. Since S is closed, e8 is open, 80  by the compactn .. 
                . , 
          of E we can find a finite subset J C 1 luch that E C  (U U,) U e8. Hence 
                                                                    lEI 
          8 C U  U,. This Ihowa that 8 is compact . 
               •  1 
               Here an lOme of the hulc properti_  of compact  seta. 
          ~. A compact ..w.t 0/ CI metric .,ace it bounded. In particular, 
          • ..,_ NCrio ".. it bounded. 
               For any metric tpaCe  is the union of ita open balla, and the union of 
         any finite number of balls is a bounded  set. 
          Propoa'tfo"  (N .. ,., •• t property).         1M 81, 8., 8., . •.  be CI aequenu oj 
         ftOMmptr  cloIetI aubaett oj G compact meCric 'lPG",  tIIitA 1M proptJrly  that 
         8 :::> 8. :::> 8.:;)  ..••  TAfn tAm ia at ,." OM point  that fIeltmtI. to eGOI& 0/ 
           1 
         1M .". 8" Sa, Sa, •••• 
               If not,  we mUlt hAve         f"\   8 ....  {lJ, implying  thAt    V      es. is 
                                          .-1,1,1....                          ...,1 ...... 
          the entire  metric apace B. Since B is compact  it is the union  of a  finite 
          number  of the open aubeetl  e81, es., e8., ••..  Bince e81 C es. C es. C 
          ..• , we mUlt hAve B - e8. for lOme n, whioh produo.  the contradiotion 
          S. - {lJ. 
               The above propotition doeI not hold if the word "compact"  ia replaced 
          by  "complete":  for  example  let  B - R,  takilll  S. - 1* E  R : * ~ n I, 
          n -1,2,3,  .... 
                                                  '--
                                              ~ 
          FJQVJUI  1" N.ted  .. propeR1.  TheN II a point  00IIIID0Il  W all the aquaree, each 01 
                       wbieb)au ball ,the dJIDIDIIoM 01 itAI pndeoeMor.  (A oIOIId Iquare"  c0m-
                       pact, b7 • t.beonm w be proved Ihortly.) 
                For & better  inaipt  into  the meanina of compactnelll, we introduce 
           another  definition. 
           ~"'do". If E is a metric space, 8 a subset of E, and  p a point  of E, 
           then p is a cl,..,. point 0/8 if any open ball with center p contains an.infinite 
           number of points of 
                                   8. 
         16    m.  MB'I'IUO  IIPA0B8 
         Theorem.       An infinm  tub,et oj II compllC' metric epGU  1Iaa lit  klllt  one 
         clu,ter point. 
              If this  were false, then for any given point of a certain  compact  metric 
         space  E  we could  find an open  ball  having  the given  point  as  center  and 
         containing  only a finite number  of points  of the infinite subset  S of E. E is 
         the  union  of all  such  open  balls.  Since  E is compact,  it is the  union  of a 
         finite  number  of such  open  balls.  This  implies  that  S is finite,  a  contra-
         diction. 
          Corollary  1.    Any ,equence oj points in a compact metric apace hili II c0n-
         vergent aub,equence. 
               Let  PI, Pt, 1'"  •••  be  the  sequence,  E  the  metric  space.  We  must 
          separate  cases, according  as the set  11'1, Pt, pa, .•• \ is infinite  or not. 
               CII8e 1.   The  set  1 PI, Pt, pa, .•• \  is  infinite.  In  this  case  the  set 
          8  - 1 PI, Pt, pa, •.• } bas at least  one cluster  point,  say l' E  E. Pick  a posi-
          tive  integer  nl such  that  1'", is in  the open  ball  of center  l' and  radius  1, 
          then pick an integer tit > nl such that 1' .. is in the open ball of center  l' and 
          radius  1/2, then  pick an integer  tit > tit euah that 1' .. is in the open ball  of 
          center  l' and  radius  1/3,  etc. j  this  process  can  be  cOntinued  indefinitely 
          since each open ball of center  l' contains  an infinite  number  of points  of 8. 
          We end up  with  a  subsequence  of  Pt, Pt, pa, ...  whose  n'" term  has  dis-
          tance  less  than  l/n  from  1',  for  all  n -  1,2,3,  ....  This  subsequence 
          converges  to p. 
               Cllle I.   The  set  1 Pt, Pt, Pa, .•. ,  is  finite.  In  this  case  at  least  one 
          point l' E  1 pa, Pt, pa, ••. \ occurs an infinite number of times in the sequence 
          PI, Pt, pa, ••••  Thus  the convergent  sequence  1', 1', 1', •••  is a subsequence 
          o( the given sequence. 
          Corollary  J.     A compllC' metric 8fXJC6 ia complete. 
                For any Cauchy sequence has a convergent  subsequence  and therefore 
          is itself  convergent. 
          Corollary!.       A compad tubeet oj II metric epGU ia cloHd. 
                For any  convergent  sequenae  of points  in  the compact  eubset  must 
          have its limit  in the compact  subset,  by Corollary  2. Thus  the theorem  of 
           §3 impliEll that the subset  is clOl8d. 
                We now know that any compact subset of a metrio space is both closed 
          and bounded.  We proceed  to prove  the fundamental  (act  that  any  closed 
          bounded  subset  of 1P is compact. 
                  Lemma.  Ld S k  0  bounded aubM 0/ B-. TAM/or  .. f  > 0, 8 "  ..... 
                  lea .. ia CAe ""iota 0/0 ftail,e aUMbtr 0/ eIoNtl NUt 0/ ...... 
                             We belin  the proof by shoWinl that B- itaell it the union 01 a '" of 
                  evenly spaced c10aed balla of radius I, .. illustrated  in Fipn 15 . 
                                                                             V  / I?"'..                      ....... 
                                                                        / I........,                    [\            r\ 
                                                                                           .7"""'..          r--.... 
                                                                        k A  ~ "-...... ~  ~ 
                                                                              .......      ~ '\.1/ 
                                                                                     1: ~  [I                         [) 
                                                                        K                        ......... 
                                                                              1/' 
                                                                              r-....        ~ ~I....o' 
                                                                        K                                II 
                                                                               ~ ~ 
                                                                                   , 
                                                                         \  ,                             j 
                                                                                            1-......... 
                                                                               ~ 
                    To be concrete, coDllider the pointe in E" of the form (0./"', Gt/., . ~ ., 
                    a./"')'  where Oa, lit,  ••• , a.. are integen  and  '" is a fixed poeitive in .... , 
                    to be determined Ihortly.  For any (Za, St, •.• , s.) E E" there are in .... 
                    CIt, fit,  ••• , a.. luch  that 
                                                                  01                       01+1. 
                                                                 -       S ~ < -, 1-1, J, ••• , a 
                                                                  '"                            '" 
                    (by LUB. of Chapter In and we theIl baft 
                                                                                                             ---------------------
                      a(SI' ... , s.),(::,  ... , :: )) - ~(Sl-';-)' + ... +(s. - :Y 
                                                                                                   < _I..!.. + ... +..!.. _ "'" . 
                                                                                                         'I",.                                 m'                 '" 
        II  m ....... c .. ACa 
        Now IUppoee that the fixed intepr '" bad been choeen greater than Vfi I t, 
        10 that  Vfi I"" < t.  Then (Zl, • 0  "  Zoo)  iI contained  in  the  cloeed ball of 
        ndiua  t  and  center  (a,J"'"  0  0  ., a./",,).  In particular  g. iI the union  of .u 
        theM balla, for  varyiDl  intepoal  -it CIt, o. 0, ca.. It remaina  to ahow that  if 
        8 C B" ia bounded  then  a &nite number  of valu.  of Gl, CIt, •• "  ca. IUfBoe 
        to pve ua balla of ndiua  t  w'" union  oontaina 8. To do thia  note  that 
        Iince 8 ia bounded  it II contained  in lOme ball with  center  at the oriJin. 
        If thiI ball baa ndiua  JI, then for each point  (Zl, *S, •• 0, z.) E 8 we have 
             1                                              I 
         v' Z1 +., + ... + Zool S JI.  Since  ,S., S v'Zi + z.I + ... + z.1  for 
        i-l,2,  .. 0, n, we have  1z,1 S JI  whenever  (Zl, *s,  00', Zoo) E 8.  If,  .. 
        above,  Gl, CIt, o  •• ,  ca.  are intepn  IUCb that  oJ"" S Z,  < ('" + 1)/"", we 
        have 
                 I: I-Iz,+(: -z,)ISIz,I+I: -z,ISM+!. 
         Hence whenever  (Zl, *t, ... , z.) E 8  we  have  1 ",I S mAl + 1, awiDl 
         that  there  will  be  only  a  &nite  number  of poIIibilitiee  for  the  intepn 
         -it'" .. 0, ca.. Thua 8 ia completely  covered by a &nite number of our clOled 
         .... ofndiua  .. 
         na.or.m.     An, clotetI bouftcIetI  aubM 01 g. if compact 
             8uppoee  the ~rem ,aile and that we have a clOled bounded  IUbeet 
         8 of II- that  ia not. COIDput.. TbeD t.bere ia a collection  of open  IUbeete 
         lUI - I U,J., of II- w'" union  oonWM 8, but IUch that the union of 
         no &nite IUbcoUection of lUI oonWM 8. Since 8 ia bounded,  the lemma 
         .....  ua that. 8 ia contained  in the union  of a &nite number  of cloeed bal .. 
         of ndiua  1/2, say Bit B., ••• , &. Thua 
                                                , 
                        8 - (8(,,\B~V(8(,,\BIJV .. · V  (8("\ Br). 
         At leut  one  of the I8tI 8 ("\ Bit 8 ("\ B., • 0  0, 8 ("\ Br,  .Y 8 ("\ BI, is not. 
         contained  in the union of any &nite IUbcoUection of lUI. 8 ("\ BI iI clOled 
         (heiDI t.he intellection  of clOIed leta)  and if 71, ,  E 8 ("\ BI then d(p. ,) S 1 
         (linea each of the pointe  71, ,  baa diatance  at moet  1/2 from  the center  of 
         t.he ball B/). Set 81 - 8 ("\ B,. Then 8 ia clOled and bounded,  not. contained 
                                               1 
         in  the  union  of any  8nite lUboolIection  of  t U I, and  if 71,' E 81  then 
         d(p, ,) S 1. Now apply the1emma to 81 and  t  - 1/4 to pt 81 contained 
         in the union of a &nite number  of clOIed balls of ndiua  1/4 and repeat the 
         above  aJ'IUDl8I1t to pt a cloeed IUbeet 8i of 8 ,  not contained  in the union 
                                                        1
         of any &nite IUbcoUection of I U J , lOch that if 71, ,  E  81 then d(p, ,) S  1/2. 
         RepeatiDl  the arpment  with II -  1/6, 1/8, 1/10, 0  0  •  we obtain  a aequeoce 
         of clOlled eetI  8 :::> 8 :::> 8. :::> 8.:::> • 0  0,  none  of which  is contained  in the 
                              1 
         union of any &nite IUboollection of  lUI, and .uch  that  if 71, ,  E 8" then 
         d(p, ,) S  lIN, for each N - 1,2,3,  ....  No 8" ia empty,  10 let 71" E  8", 
         N - 1,2, a, .... The eequence ".,,.,,.,  •••  ia. CauchJ 1IqUIDCe,  IiDce 
         if a,  fJ.  N are PQIIitive intepra  aad  ., fJ > N the ,., ~ E BII, 10  that 
         "(P., piJ ~ lIN.  8io.ce B"  ia oomplete, the IIqUIIIOe  "., PI. Pa, •••  eo. 
         YeI'I- to •  point PI of B". Since each polnt "., PIt ", •••  ia in the cloIecl 
         .. 8, we have aIIo PI E 8. Bence PI II in ODe of the ... of the ooUection 
         ( UI, lAY "E u. E (U). Since U. ia open there Ie aD open ball of eenter PI 
         and lOme radlua  • > 0  that ia entirely  contained in U .. PioklOme N 80 
         larp that lIN < ./2 and tI(po, PH) < ./2. Then  for aDy  point I' E 811 we 
         have 
                                                       •     1     •     • 
                  tI(po, 1') ~ tI(pa, PH) + d(PH, 1') < "2 + N  < "2 +"2 - .. 
         Thua  BII ia eontained in the open ball of center PI and ndiua  I,  living 
         BH C  U .. Tbia contradicts the statement  that  BH ia DOt. contained in the 
         union of any &nita aubcollection of {UI, oompletilll the proof. 
                                                                16.  CONNECnDNESS. 
              The intuitive idea of oonneotecme. ia Iimple 1IIOuP. It ia W'fIt.n.ted 
         in Fiaure 16. But of coune we need • precise definition. 
                     Flau .. 11. A, B, C, A V C, B V C, A V B V C are eoDIIeOtAld. 
                                AVBiaDOt. 
          ~don. A metric apace B ia ~ if the onlysubeeta of B which 
          are both open and clOlled are B and fd. A subset B of a metric apace is • 
          conMClMl aubaet if the subspace B is connected. 
          60     m. IOITIIIO  BP.lOU 
                ThUll a metric apace E that is not connected hal a aubeet A,. S, IlJ 
          that is both open and c1oeed. Then aIIO SA ,. S, IlJ is both open and clo.ed. 
          Setting B - eA, we have E -.A U B, where A and B are disjoint nonempiy 
          open aubaete of E. Conversely if a metric spaceE can be written E - AU B, 
          where A and B are disjoint nonempty open aubaete of E, then E is not con-
          nected: for A ,. IlJ (given), A ,. E (ain!ltl A and B are disjoint and B ,. 1lJ) 
          and  A is both open (given)  and c10eed (aince ite complement B is open). 
                If a,",eER,  we.y that e ia .......  a GrId" if either a < c <" or 
          6<e< .. 
           Propoftdon.          Any """" 0/ R tllAic1& conlainl  two ditUrtd pointe a GrId 6 
           ,.." «loa flOC eonIain all pointe between a GrId II ia flOC connecIed. 
                 For auppoee that a < c < 6 and that 8 is a aubeet of R with a, 6 E 8, 
           cE8.  Then 
                         8 - (8r'!  (s E R: s < cJ) U  (8r'!  (s E R : s > cJ) 
           expl'ell88ll 8 88 the union of two disjoint DOnempty open aubaete. 
                 It wi1I be .hown .hortly  tbat any c10eed interval in R i. connected. In 
           the next chapter  it wiU be aeen how to deduce from this fact that certain 
           other metric sp&ceI,  for example balla in ga, or the aubaete A, B, C of Figure 
           16, are connected. The followinl is one of the principalal'lUmente  one UII8I 
           to prove theBe and other connectedn_  reaulte for aubaete of ga. 
           Pro,...dora.         Lt1C  (8.1., ". a collet:Iion 0/ conneIlCetI ,.",.,.  0/ a  tneCric 
           .,.. B. ~ lAIN .." it E 1 .- IIuJt fur eaeA i E 1 "., .", 8. GrId 
           &, late a nonempe,..,.,--.  TAM V  8. ia ~ 
                                                             ., 
                 Suppoee that 8 - U  8. is the union of two  disjoint  open aubeetl  A 
                                          ., . 
           and  B. We mUllt .how  that  either  A  or  B  is  empty.  For  any  i E 1, 
           B. - (A r'! 8,) U (B r'! B.) exp .... the connected I8t B. 88  the  union  of 
           two  disjoint open aubHte, 10  that  A r'! 8.  and  B r'! 8,  are  jUllt the  IIetI 
           8., IlJ in  lOme order.  Without  Ie. of  pnerality  we  may  88Iume  tbat 
            A r'! B .. -  B ... Then  A :> 8 .. , 10 that for each i E 1 we have A r'! 8. ,. 1lJ. 
           ThUll A r'! 8, - 8. and  B r'!8.  - SlJ. Since B r'! 8, -                SlJ  for  all  i  E  1  we 
           have B .. SlJ, proving the proposition. 
            Theorem.         R, or tiny open or cloHd interval in R, ia etmnet:Ced. 
                  A IOmewhat more leneralltatament  is just 88 easy to prove, namely 
            that  any aublet  8  of R which contains aU pointe between any two of ita 
            points is connected. To prove this, auppoee that lOch alUblet  B is om con-
          nected, 10 that we may write 8 - A U B, when A .. B an cIIIJoIat __ 
          empty  opeillUbeeti  01 8. ChooM _ e A, be B aacl ......,  -                   we 1Ila7. 
          that _ < b. By ueumption  (_, b) C 8. Set A& - A" (., b). B. - B" I., b). 
          Then A., B. are disjoint  open IUbeete of (_. bJ, _ EA ••• E Bit and (., .1 -
          A. U B •. From  theM facta we derive.  contndiction, _1aUCnrI. 8IDee B. 
         ia an open  IUbeet of (_, b), ita complement  A& iI .........  01 (G. .1. 
         hence •  clOI8d aubeet 01 R. Since A& Ie aIIO """8"\P*)' ... bouacIed 110m 
         above, the lut nault of 12 tella u. that theN ..............  t cia A .. 
         Since b E  B. we must  have c < b. But Iince A. Ie an .". 10" 01 (., .1 
          it must contain  the intenlection  of [., b) with lOme OJMD ball in R 01 ... 
          c. hence it mu.t contain point.  peater  than c. Tbilil  • 00Idndictl0D., ... 
          thie proves the theorem. 
          PROBLEMS 
           1.  Verily that the.follcnriq  ....  metric epuII: 
               (.)  all II-tupl.  01 real Dum~ with 
                               II«ZI, .". z..}. (,s, "., rJ) - ~ Iz. -.,.1 
               (b)  aD bounded iDbite  lIqUtIDOIIa  - (Sa, .........  ) 01 ......  01 a, db 
                    II(a,r) - I.u.b.' ISa - .. I.IZI-.. I,I .. - .. I, ... 1 
               (e)  (B. X Bs, 11). where (Bb cit), (Bs, cit) .... me&ric ..,..,.  ... I  II alWD bJ' 
                    II«Ift.~, (,s.r.» - max ,cIt(Ift,N,clhs.r.lJ. 
           2.  Show that  (R X R. II) •• metric ..... when 
                                                   Irl 
                           II«z. V), (z', r'»  - {    + 1 .. 1 + la - rl  'ih'" r 
                                                   Iv-v'l                   Ha-r. 
               IDUltrate by diapama  in the plane If' what the opeD balII 01 tIdI ......... 
               ..... 
           3.  What .... the open  and cloIed baDa in the metric .... 01 .....  (t),  t l? 
               Show that two balJa 01 dilereat  ceaWn aDd ndii may be .......  What ..... 
               open leta in this metric  apace? 
            4.  Show that the IIlba of If' PYfID by I (Sa. z.) e 81 : Sa > ZlJ II a,.. 
            5.  Prove that afty bounclecI opeD IIlben 01 •  ill the UDioa 01 cIiriIaIat ......... 
               vale. 
            8.  Show that the IIlbiet of If' PYfID by '(Sa, 1ft) e 81 : .... - 1, .. > 01 II ..... 
            7.  Give the details of the proof of the ... pnpoIltiaa  0111 ............. 
               fl'Olll below. 
            8.  PIoYe that H the pointe 01. _  .............  01 paildlia  ........ 
               .... reardend. tIIIn the ..., .... _      -ftIIIII  tit .... _     .... 
           61     W ........ O .. .t.OIIa 
            9.  Prove that  lim,. -, in  a given  metric  apace if and  only  if  the  aequeac:e 
                                 -
                 Pt, "  PI, "  PI,',  •..  is convergent. 
           10.  Prove that  if  lim,. -, in  a  given  metric  space  then  the  Bet  of  pointe 
                                    -
                 I", "., PI, PI, ••• I is c1oeed. 
           11.  Bhow that if ., ., Ge, •••  is a aequence of real numbers  that  converges  to ., 
                 thea 
            12.  Prove that  the aequence Z., z.. Zt, • ••  of real  numbers  given  by  z ... 1 and 
                  Zo.+. -  z. + ~ for each"  - 1,2,3,  ...  is unbounded. 
                                  z. 
            18.  CoDIider the aequence of real numbers 
                                                1       1            1 
                                                j'  --I'                1  , .... 
                                                     2+- 2+-
                                                          :I         2+! 
                                                                           2 
                  Show tII&t this lICpIeDce  is converpDt  and find ite limit  by fint  IIhowiq  that 
                  the two lIqueoeea at alterDate  terma are monotonic  and findinc their limite. 
            1'- Prove tUt &D7 IIqUeDCI8  in  R baa a monotoDic IUbeequence.  (Hine: Tbia  is 
                  .., if there elIiIta a 1Ut.equence with no least  term, hence we may BUppoee 
                  &11M eICb IIlbeequeDce has a leut term.) (Note  that  this  result  and  the theo-
                  laD OD the converpDC8  of boUDded monOtOnic leQuences gives another  proof 
                  tII&t •  II comp ...... ) 
            11.1MB be a 1Ut.t of the metric Ip&Ce  B. A point ,  E B is called an ir&lerior 
                  ,... of B if there is an opeD  baD in B of center ,  which is contained  in B. 
                  Prove that  the -' of interior  pointe  of 8 is an open BUbeet of B (called the 
                  iMriIr of 8) that contains  all other  open subeete of B that are contained  in 8. 
             18.  Let 8 be a 1Ubeet. of the metric epaoe B. Define the cloauu of', denoted;9,  to 
                  be the intenection  of all ebed IUbeete of B that. contain  ,. Show that 
                   (a)  J::> 8, and 8 Ia ebed if and oaly if J - 8 
                   (b)  J is the -' of all limit.  of eequeoees of pointe of ,  that. converp  in B 
                   (0)  a point  ,  E B  is in J if and oraly if any  ball  in  E of center ,  contains 
                         pointe  of "  which is true  if and  only  if, ill not  an  interior  point. of e8 
                         (ar. Prob.  11). 
             17.  1M' be a BUbeet of the metric  apace B. The bouradcarr of ,  is defined  to be 
                   J "iI (of. Prob. 18). Show that 
                   (a)  B II the disjoint  union  of the  interior  of "  the  interior  of  e8,  and  the 
                         bouDdary  of , 
                   (b)  B Ia c&o.cl if and only if ,  contains  ita boundary 
                   (0)  B is opeD if and only if ,  and its boundary  are disjoint.. 
             18.  If G •• Ge.... ... ill a  bouaded ........  01  real DUIIlhIra, cIefiDe Iim .. P" 
                    (also denoted IIiii a.) to be                                                                         ..-
                                        --
                              l.u.b. (~ e • : .. > ~ for an iDfiDitAlllUlDber of intepn  "I 
                   and defioe lim inf .. (also denoted Jim a.) fA) be 
                                      -                                -
                              g.l.b. I~ e. : .. <:r; for an infiDite DUmber 01 intepn  "I.                                         . 
                    Prove that lim inf .. S lim &Up ... with the equality holding if and ooIy if the 
                                       -                  --
                    aeqUeoC8  CODVerpa. 
             19.  Let  AI. Ge.... . .. and 6. .... ba. •••  be  bounded aequeocea of  real numbers. 
                    Show that             lim &Up ( .. + ba) S lim IUP" + lim IUp ba • 
                                             . ~                           ........ 
                    with the equality holding if one of the oricinal aeqU8DC88 CODVerae8  (el. Prob. 
                    18). 
             10.  The oompIu DQlDben  C - •  x. (el. Prob. 8, Chap. II) are the UIIIlerlyins 
                    .. 01 the  metrio .......  The IIMItric in .. therefore makee C  iteelf • 
                    metrie .....  If _ e c, the ",.,.."  raI. 01 _, cIeaoted by I_I. is defined by 
                     1_1-d(_. 0). Show that 
                    (a)  I~ + 'wi - ~ if :r;, We. (and therefore I_I agrees with the pre-
                           vioully de6aed I_I if _ e .) 
                     (b)  I" + .. 1 SI-.I+I .. I for all ", .. e C 
                     (c)  IUtI- 1111' 1 .. 1 for all II ... e c. 
              21.  Show that  the propoaition of pap 48 remains Vue if the word "real" is re-
                    placed by "complex" (of. Prob. 20). 
              22.  A ftCIrInICI ......  ."... is a veofA)r epaoe V over •• fA)pther with a real-valued 
                     function on V, called the IICIf'If& and indicated by  A H. the value 01 • H u AllY 
                     element ~ e V beinc iDdicated 8:r;H. having the following propertiea: 
                        (i)   HeA ~ 0 fCit all ~ e V 
                       ('ai)  n~D - 0 if and ooIy if ~ - 0 
                      (iii)   Res. -lei'  R~ for any e e V and AllY e e. 
                     (iiii)   II~ + W. S lsi + nrll for any ~. W e V." 
                            Show that  •  DOl'IDed vecfA)r epaoe V beoomeII a metric  apaoe if for AllY 
                     ~. W e V we take d(~. W)  - De - ,I. Beua1l that  the Bet 01 all n-tuplea 01 real 
                     numbers 
                                   is a vector apace .- over •  if .ddition  and acaIar multiplication are 
                     de6aed by 
                                     (~., .... eJ + (r.,  .... N - (z. + WIt .... :r:. + rJ, 
                                                      e(~I •••. , ~ - (esl •••.• ~. 
                     Show that .- becomes • IlOrmed vecfA)r apace if II(~I ••.•• :r:.)U is taken fA) be 
                      v' ~.i + ... +:r:.' and that  in this cue the reaultiog  metric apace is jlllt  8-; 
                     ahow that if "  - 2 and C is identified with .... in Prob. 20 then C becomes 
                     •  normed 7ecfA)r apace with n,n -I_I. Show that .- becomes another DOrmed 
                      vector apace if H(e •••..• ~ n is defined to be I ~II + •.• + I :r:.I, and yet another 
                      Dormed vector apace if II (~ ••...•  :r:.)11 is defined to be max II ~.I .....  1:r:.11 . 
                      (Note: What we have for brevity called.  DOrmed vector apace is more prop-
                      erly called •  real ftCIrInICI NCIor apace; tben  is also the  notion of a  complu 
         64    III.  MJ!lTIUC SPACBS 
              normetI tJeCfDr tpaa,  got  by  altering  the above  definition  by  twice  replacing 
              the symbol R by C.) 
         23.  Prove that if V is a nonned  vector space (el. Prob.  22) and 0., lit, CIt, • ••  and 
              la, bt, bt, .••  are convergent  l8qUences of elements  of V with  limits  0  and " 
              napective1y,  then 
                         lim (Iloo + b.)  - a + b  and  lim (a. - ".)  - 0  -   b, 
                         .....                            ,,-. 
              and if furt.hermore rio el, el, •••  is a I'ICquenee of real  numbers convergiq  to c, 
              then                            lim c.a.  - ro . 
                                              . ~. 
         24.  Show that a complete subspace of a metric space is a closed subeet. 
          25.  Write  down in all detail  the  proof that  E· is complete.  (H,"': A convenient 
              notation  is p. - (s,(·',  ... , s.(·').} 
          26.  Find all cluster points of the subset of R given by 
                                  {~ + ~ : "', m ... positive integers}-
          ?:T.  Let 8 be a nonempty  subset of R that is bounded from above but has no great-
              est element.  Prove  that  l.u.b. 8  is a cluster  point  of 8. 
          28.  Prove  that  a subeet of a metric space is closed if and only if it contalna all its 
               cluster pointe. 
          29.  Let 8  be a subset  of a metric space E and let" E E. Bhow that p is a cluster 
               point  of  8  if and  only  if p  is the  limit  of a  Cauchy sequence  of  points  in 
               8"elpl. 
          30.  Give an example of each of the following: 
               (a>  an infinite subeet of R with no cluster point 
               (b)  a complete metric space that is bounded  but not compact 
               (c)  a metric space none of whose closed balls is complete. 
          31.  Let  0," E  R, 0 < b.  The  following outlines  a  proof  that  (a, b)  is  compact. 
               Rewrite thill proof, filling in  all details:  Let  I U,I,el  be a  collection  of open 
               subl!ets  of  R  whose  union  contains  [a, b).  Let  S - 1% E (a, b) : s  > 0  and 
               [a, s) is contained  in t·be u.nlon of a  finite  number  of the  sets  I U,l,el I. Then 
               l.u.b.  S E  U, for some i E 1. Since U, is open we must have l.u.b. 8  - b E 8. 
          32.  Show that  the union of a finite number  of compact subsets  of a metric space 
               is compact. 
          33.  Let E be a compact  metric  space,  1 U,I,el  a collection of open subsets  of E 
               whose union  is E. Show that  there  exists a real  number  f  > 0 such that  any 
               closed ball in E of radius.  is entirely  contained  in at least one set  U,. (H,"': 
               If not,  take  bad  balls of radii  I, 3-i, U, ...  and  a  cluster  point  of their  cen-
               ters.) 
          M.  If  (s., ... , z.) E E- and  W"  ••. , r.) E B-,  then  (S., •.• , s., '"  ... , ,.) E 
               E-..... Therefore  if 8  and  T are  lllbaets  of E- and  E- respectively,  we may 
               identify  8  X T with  a subset  fi E-+-. Prove  that  if 8  and Tare  nonempty, 
               then  8  X T is bounded,  or open, or closed, or compact,  if and only if both  8 
               and  T are bounded, or open, or closed, or compact, reepective1y. 
             35.  Call.  metric apace  ......,.ei.",  .,...,..  H ..,., ... _  .........  _ 
                     _ .........  Pro .. daM • metrio apace illICpItIdIaIlJ  ..............                                                    . 
                     ....,.  bdbdt.e _baa .........  paint. 
              38.  Call. metrie apace ,.", ........  H, for ..,., • > 0, tbe .........  II .. 
                     uaioa of • _t.e number of ...... of ndiae .. Flowe ........  ..... 
                     .. t.otall7 bouDded Hand 0Dl7 H..,.,......,.  .... 0aueItr .1."_, 
              111.  Pro .. that  the followiq  three oonditioae OD ...........  (cf ..... II, 
                     .) .... equlvaleat: 
                        0)  B is compact 
                       (ti)  B is eequentially  compact 
                      (Iii)   B is totally  bounded and complet.e 
                      (Hiwl:  That  (i) impliel  (6)  occun in tbe text. 'I'Mt  (Ii) impIfII  (II)  II ..,. 
                     That  (iii)  impliee (i) foBo ... from tbe ........  of tile ... pIOCIf of 11.) 
              38.  Prove that an opeD (cIoeed) IUbaa of • metric ..... B II eoDII88tecl.ud  0Dl7 
                      if it ill not the diajoint wUoa of two DOII8IDpty opal  (eIoIed)  ...... of •• 
     CHAPTER  IV 
     Continuous  Functions 
                   Elementary  analysis is largely concerned with real-
                 valued  functions  of a real variable.  Moet  fil'8t COUl'8es 
                 in  calculus  quote  and  use,  but  refrain  from  proving, 
                 such  theorems  about  continuous  real-valued  functions 
                 on a closed interval  in R as the attaining  of a maximum 
                 and  the  intermediate  value  theorem.  Among  other 
                 things  the  present  chapter  proves  a  number  of  such 
                 fundamental  facts  on  real-valued  functions  of  a  real 
                 variable.  But it would not be reasonable to restrict  our-
                 Belves to luch  functions  alone, for elementary  calculus 
                 &leo involves  real-valued  functions  of  more  than  one 
                 real variable,  that is real-valued  functions on subsets of 
                 lOme Euclidean space, and it aleo involves finite sets of 
                 real-valued  functions  01 one or several variables,  as for 
                 example  when  a  curve  or  surface  in  lOme Euclidean 
                 apace is given parametrically  or when complex-valued 
                 functions  are  considered.  Thus  the  natural  claee of 
                 functions  to consider would appear  to be functions  on 
                 one metric  space with  values in another  metric  space. 
                 It is  for  lIuch functions  that  we define  the  notion  of 
                 continuity,  deriving  from  this  generality  the  usual 
                 advantages  of clarity  of concept and obligation to do a 
                 thing  only  once.  Our  basic  theorems  will be general 
                 results  on continuous  fUllctions from one metric space 
                 to  another,  from  which  the  basic  results  needed  for 
                 elementary  calculus  can  be  read otT  by  taking  both 
                 metric spaces to be subsets  of R. At the same time we 
                 go  forward,  developing  a  number  of  useful  concepts 
                 that  ueually do not appear  in elementary  COUl'8e8, such 
                 as uniform  continuity.  A final section  on sequences of 
                 functioDi will ilIuatrate  the previous  concepta  and  will 
                 provide us with further  examples of metric spaces, use-
                 ful in the sequel. This last section  could more logically 
                 be placed at the beginning of Chapter  VII  than  here, 
                 but ita flavor is more like that  of the present  chapter. 
         68   IV.  CONTINUOUS I'UNC'I10NB 
                                   II.  DEFINITION OF CONTINUITY. EXAMPLES. 
              By a function on a metric apace B we of COUI'8e mean a function on the 
         let of pointe  of B, and  by a function  with  values in a metric  apace 1£' we 
         mean & function with values in the set of pointe of 1£'. Thus if IiI a function 
         from the metric lpace  B into  the metric apace 1£', written 
                                             I: B-B', 
         then  to  each  point  l' E  B  il 8IIOCiated a  point  1(1') E1£'.  The  function 
         I: B -  1£' will be called continuous  at a point  Po E  E if, roughly speaking, 
         pointe of B that are near Po are mapped  by I into pointe of E' that are near 
         1(".).  Here il the precise definition: 
         Dfdin.ition.     Let E and B' be metric spaces, with distances denoted  d and 
         d' respectively,  let I: B -   1£' be a function,  and let Po E  E. Then I is said 
          to  be contiftUOUB at ". if, given any  real number  I  > 0, there  exiIta  &  real 
          number I > Osuch thatif1'E  Band d(p, 'Po) < a, thend'(j(p},/CPo»               < e. 
               The number  I  of COUl'8e  depends  on  I, 10 we could  more accurately 
          have written  1(.) instead  of I. We Rick to the notation  a rather  than 1(.) 
          for  notational  simplicity,  always  bearing  in  mind  that  each  ( must  have 
          ite own I. 
               The definition may be reformulated  by saying tbat I is continuous  at 
          'Po if, given any open ball in E' of center 1(".),  there exilte an open ball in E 
          of center  ". whose image under I is contained  in the former ball.  Another 
          reformulation  il that I is continuous  at ". if, given any open subset  of E' 
          that contains/{fJe),  there existe an open subset of B tbat contains 'Po whose 
          image under I is contained  in the former open subset. 
               If Band 1£' are both subaete of R  (80 that we have & real-valued  func-
          tion of a real variable)  the original definition sa1l that I is continuous  at 'Po 
          if, given any  I> 0, there existe a I  > 0 such that  1/(1'} -/(",) I < • when-
          ever l' E  E and  11' - ".1 < I. This  is illustrated  in Figure  17. 
          Definition.     If E, E' are metric  spaces and I: E -      B' is a function,  then 
          J is said to be contiftuOUl 01& B or, more briefly, continUOUB, if I is continuous 
          at all pointe of E. 
                                                                                    11. DIIftlll'l'lOIl    01' 00IIft1l1ll,",      " 
                                                                                                                                ,  -/(;I) 
                                     • 
                       ----- ---------------
                                     • 
                                                                      p. 
                        ExAMPL. 1.  The  function  I: R-R  Biven by I(e) - .. lor .. 
                 s  E  R is continuous.  To prove this we have to Ibow tbM 1 II OOIlti_  M 
                 each Zo E R. We have  to Ihow  tba~ for .., • > 0 we can &nd •  I > 0 
                 IUch tha~ I" -:ell < • whaJ.ever Ie - _I < I. But. __ 
                                             I" - :el1-I(e + are)(e - are) I 
                                                             -I (e - _  + "'(aI  - are) 1 
                                                             S (Ie - _I + 11_1)1-- _I. 
                 we will have  I" -:ell < • if Ie - _I < 1 and Ie - _I <1/ (1 + II_I)· 
                 Hence we may  take'  - min 11, f/(1 + 21_1>1. 
                        EXAMPL. 2.  Let Ebe any metric apace, ,. • Sud point. of B. TIleD 
                 the function I: E - R given by 1(P) - "(p, JIt) lor all p E  II II COIl"'" 
                 To prove this we have to Ihow that 1 is contiDUOUB at .., p .. paiat " 
                 of B. But            I/(P) -/<PI) I -I "(p, JIt) - "(pa, JIt) I s cI(p, H, 
                 10 if we have "(p, 711) < • then also II(P) -/(pa) I < .. TIl. for MrI JMIiD' 
                 Pto correeponding to any  e > 0 we ean chcae • - .. 
                        The epecial  cue E - R, ,. - 0 Mon that the fane&ion lei II ~ 
                 tinuoua. 
                        EXAMPLB 3.  Any  eonatant function  is coatift'"  In ...... 
                 and E' are arbitrary  andt.hepoint/(p)                        e B' •  the .........  , es ....... 
                 we .... ,. have  t1(jCp),/(JIt)  - 0,10  Biven any  ,.e Bud..,  • > 0 
                 we can take a to be a, poaitive DU1ftber. 
            'Ie    IV.  COllftNUOUli  nIIanON. 
                   Elwm.B  <l.  The identity  function on a met.ric space ia continuoua. 
            Hen II ia an arbitrary  meVie .... and I: B - B ia pven  by IC,) - , 
            for all ,  E  B. Hence tI(Jc,), I(p.)  - tic" p.). Thus for each PI E  B, pven 
            .>Owecanchooee.-                       .. 
                   '!'be IpICial ... B - R Ihowt tUt. the function s  (the U8Ual way of 
            writiq  the identity  function on the nil nne) ia continuoua. 
                   EuIm.II  s.  The "step function" I: R - R liven by 
                                                                  o  ifs<O 
                                                               {
                                                    I(s)  -       1  ·f       > ° 
                                                                       1  s_ 
            ia continuoua at all nonsero pointe, .nee I ia coaatant  when s  > ° and ..., 
            wIleD s< 0. But/ia tIOC oontinUOUIat 0. For if we test continuity at the point 
            ,. - 0 with positive lSI &hen we can lind no corresponding ,  > 0, since 
             for&nJ' ,  > OandanysE  (-',0)  we have I/(z)  -/(0)1-10  -11- 1. 
                    Ex.w ....  6.  The function I: R -                     R liven  by 
                                                         Jl  if s ia rational 
                                             I(s)  - '0  if s ia not rational 
             ia continuous at. no point.  For &nJ' open ball in R containa both  numberl 
             that. are rational and numben  that are not. (we already know we can find 
             a rational number.  in the baD, and if" ia &oJ' fixed irrational number and 
             N a IUtlicientlyiarp  intepr  &hen the irrational  number.  + "IN will _ 
             be in the ball). ThUl for &oJ'''  E  R and any positive « S 1, a corresponding 
             , > ° cannot. be found. 
                    Eu ......  7.  If I: B-B'  ia continUOUl and 8  ia a aubepace of B, 
             then the Nlt.l'iction of I to 8  ia continuoua on 8. Thia  ia clear from the 
             definitioaa. 
                    The followinl criterion for the continuit.y of a function from one metric 
             apace into another ia often uaefuI. 
              rro,...cdon. 1M B, B' be mtIric .,... _I: E - E' a furu:Wm. TAen 
             lie ..,.,. .... iJ anti """ iJ, lor ..,., Of"" ""*' U 01 E', 1M irwer"  i"..,. 
                                                t-I(U) - I, e B : 1(P) e UI 
              ie _  .,. ""*' 01 B. 
                     To prove thie, lirat. SUpp088 that I ia continuous. We have to show that. 
              if U C B' _open, then -f"I(U) ia open. Let.,. et-I( U). Then/<Pt> e U. 
              Since U _ open,  it contailll  the open ball  in B' of center I(Pt)  and lOme 
              ..u .. I  > 0. Since I- continuoua a& ,. there _ a .. > ° such that. if ,  e 11 
              _"(P, p.) < ,then tI'(J(,),/(p.)                         < .. Thia meana thatif,  ia contained 
                                                                  11.  DUlIIITIOIi  O. COII'nIiUlTY      TI 
          in the open ball in B of eenter Po and 1'Idi1ll • then I(p)  is contained  in the 
          open  ball in ll'  of eenter I(pi) and ndi1ll  .. 10  that 1(1) E u. That  is, 
          J-I( U) containa the open ball in B of center  Po &ne\ radiua I. Since Po "11 
          any point  of t-I(U),  the .. t-.(U)  is open.  Conveftle17, auppoee that  for 
          fN8l1 open U C B', the .. t-I(U)  is an open aulat  of B. We muat Ihow 
          that I is continuoua at any point  Po E B. For any  e > 0 the I8t 
                             f"'(lopen  ball in B' of center 1(,,)  and radiua eJ) 
          is an open IUbeet of B that contaiDl '" hence containB the open ball in B 
          of center  Po and lOme ndiua  • > O. Thua if P E B and d(p, JIt} < ',then 
          tf(j(P),/(")        < eo  This  meana that I is continuoua at '" and  thia com-
           pletes the proof. 
           Corollary.       111 gO c:onJinUOUl real-fHllU«l/lmdion on 1M metric apace B 
           """ lor _II II E R 
                             Ip E 8: 1(P) > at  tmd  Ip E 8 : ICp) < at 
           care open ..",."  01 8. 
                 For the Beta Iz E R : z> lit and  Iz E R  : z < lit are  open lubeeta 
           ofR. 
                 The following rault  is uaually parap1uued  "a continuoua function of 
           a continuoua function is a continuoua function". 
           Propoaldora.         Let  8,  1£',  E"  be  metric apacea, I: 8-8',  ,: E' -E" 
           Jun.cliqu.  TAm if I tmd ,  care c:ontinuoua, 10 g  1M /unt:lior& , 0  I: E -                E". 
           More ~, if Po E E tmd I g continuoua at Po tmd ,  g  eonCinuoua at 
           l(pe) E E', """ , 0 I g c:onlinuoua at p..                   . 
                 We need only prove the latter,  more preciae, part. Let d, tf, tf' denote 
           the  three  metrica. Suppose  e > 0 i. given. Then,  linee  ,  iB continuOUl at 
           l(pe),  there  exiata • > 0  luch  that  if  q E ll'  and  d'(q,/<Po»  <. then 
           tf'(,(q),,(/(JJ.»)      < e.  But  linee  I ia continuoua  at Po. corresponding  to 
           thia •  there  exiate a  number  " > 0  auch  that  if P E B and  d(p, JIt} < " 
           then  tf(jCp),/(pe»         < •. Therefore  if  pEE  and  d(p, Po) <"  we  have 
           tf'(,(/(P»,  ,(/(p.»)  < e,  proving,  0 I  continuoua  at ,.. 
                  The above arpment  iB illuatrated  in Figure 18 on the next pap. 
                 The  weak  verBion of  the  lut  propoeition,  where I: B - B'  and 
           ,: E' - ll"  are &IIUIIUId to be continuoua everywhere, can be proved very 
           limply  by meana of the previoua criterion  for continuity,  as followa. U U 
           is any open IUt.et of ll", the continuity  of, impliea that rl(U)  iB an open 
            IUbaet of B', 10 the continuity  of limpliea  thatt-I(,-I(U»               iB an open wt.et 
            of  U. But for any  U C 1£", if p E B then  p E t-I(r'( U»  if and  only if 
             'II     IV.  CON'J'ltf110tJ8  rtlNCTlON8 
             /(p)  E  g-I(U),  which is tmeif and only if g(J(p»  E  U. Thusf"I(g-I(U»                                      .. 
              (g 0  f)-I(U).  We have  thereCore shown  that  if U is an open subset  of E", 
                                 I
                                  ( 
              then  (g 0 n- U) is an open subset oC E, which implies that g 0/ is contin-
              uous. 
                        B 
                                              --------------------~ 
                                                                  ,-I 
                       FlG11IIII 18. A continuoUi function  of a eontinuoUi function is continuolIL 
                                                                             12.  CONTINUITY AND LIMITS. 
                      Consider  the  following  question:  Let  E,  E'  be  metric  spaces,  let 
               p. E  H, let elp.1 be the complement  of  'p.1 in E, and  let  /:  elp.l- E' 
               be a function.  Is it poasible to extend  the definition of /  to all of E in such 
               a way as to obtain  a function from E into E' that is continuous  at p.? 
                      In one case the answer to this question is trivial,  and that is the  case 
               where p. is not a cluster point of E. For if p. is not a cluster point of E then 
               _II function  from E into E' is continuous at p.. This is 10 since there exists 
               a ball in E of center  p. that contains  only a finite number  of points  of H, 
               hence a ball of center  p. and smaller radius that contains  only the point flo. 
               If a is the  radius  01 the  latter  ball  then  the  statements  that  pEE and 
               d(p, p.)  < a imply  that  p - "..  Thus  for  any /: B -                            B' and any p E  B 
               such that d(p, Po> < a we have d'U(P),/(Po»  - O. 
                      In the cue where p. is a cluster point of B we are led to the foDowllll 
               definition. 
               D"Ifinltiora.         Let  E, E'  be metric  spaces,  let  Po be a cluster  point  of  E, 
               and let/:  e(p.l- E' be a function.  A point  q E  E' is called a limit oj /  til 
               Po if the function from  Einto  E' which is the same as/on elPoI and which 
               takes  on the value q at Po is continuous  at Po. 
                      n is useful  to  reword  this,  without  directly  using the  notion  of con-
               tinuity. 
                                                                          ,2. CON1'1NUl'I'1'  AND  LlMlTII     1a 
           Definition'.        Let E, E' be metric spaces, let Po be a cluster point of E, and 
           let I: e 1 Pol -    E' be a function. A point q E  E' is called a limit  01 I at ". if, 
           given  any  E > 0,  there  exists  a  15  > 0  such  that  .if  pEE,  P"""  and 
           d(p, Po)  < 15, then d'(j(p),  q) < f. 
                 Given E, E', a cluster point Po of E and I: eIPoI-E',  there can aiR 
           at  most  one limit  of I  at  Po- The  argument  iB  the  &arne aa that  for the 
           uniqueneaa of the  limit  of a  convergent  sequence:  If q, q' E  E'  are  two 
           limits  of I  at po,  then  given any  f  > 0  there  exists a  IJ > 0  Buch that  if 
           pEE, p ,. po and  d(p, Pe) < 15  then  tl(j(p),  q) < • and l(j(p),  q') < .. 
           Since Po is a cluster point of E, there actually  exist points pEE such that 
           P ;po!  Po  and  d(p, Po) < 15,  80  that  we can  deduce  that  tl'(q, q')  < 2 •. Since 
           this  is true  for any  f  > 0 we have tl'(q, q') - 0, 80 that  q - q'. 
                  If, under the above conditions, a limit of I at ". exists, then since the 
           limit is unique we may speak of the limit of I at ". and we denote this 
                                                          Iim/(p) . 
                                                         .... " 
                  The statement  that Iim/(p)  exists implies that we have metric spaces 
                                              .... " 
            E and E' in mind, that Po is a cluster point of E, and that we have a function 
           I: e 1 Po) -    E'  such  that  for lOme point  q E  E' q is a limit  of I at  "..  In 
            discu88ing lim/(p)  we may be explicitly given a function I that  happens 
                           .... I'e 
            to  be defined at Po, but  this  is immaterial:  the  limit  of I  at ". doee not 
            depend on whether or not I is defined at Po nor, if it is, on what its value 
            at Po is, but rather  on the values of I(p)  for p near, but distinct  from, ".. 
                  In the above work we started  with a function I which waa de6ned at 
            all points of a metric space but one, but it is poasible to diacuu  limits of 
            functions  whi(~h are defined on relatively  small subsets of a metric IJ)&C8. 
            For example suppose E, E' are metric spaces and that we have an arbitrary 
            subset  SeE that  haa at leaat one cluster  point  in  B, topther  with  a 
            function  /: a ...... E'.  If p. E  E  i.  a  cluster  point  of  a we  can  conaider 
            Iim/(p)  rfliatilJfllo  Ihfl BUbapact au IPoI 01 E  and  one then  speab  of the 
            .... I'e 
            limit  oll(p)  aa P approachu Po on a. Thus a specific metric space E m1llt be 
            bome in mind in considering lim I(p),  and in the lut cue the space to be 
                                                     .... " 
            bome  in  mind  is actually  not  E,  but  the  subspace  8U 1".1.  The  moat 
            frequently  arising case iB  that  in which I is defined on a  part  of B that 
            includes all  points  of  an  open  ball  in  E  of center  ".,  with  the  possible 
            exception of Po- Here we maintain  the same notation 
                                                          liml(p) 
                                                          .... I'e 
            without  any reference to the fact that I may not be defined far away from 
             Po: it is enough that I be defined near Po, except poesibly at ". itself. 
               w. pn our &nt. definition of the Iimi~ of & function  in terma of coo-
          tinuity,  but  one  can  equally  well de&ne continuity  in  terma of limite  of 
         functioaI.  If I: B -   II'  _ &  function  hom  one metric  IpIee  into  another 
          aDd PI E E, then I_ continU0U8 &~ "  if and only if, if "  _ & cluater point 
          of B, tbeD 
                                           lim/(P)  -/<Po)· 
                                           ... ,.. 
          Tbia fact iI 01 ... from the definitiona. 
               III the preoediDi chapter we c:IiIoUIIId the notion 01 & limi~ of & lequence 
          of paiDta In & metric .....  ThiI too can eulI7 be de8ned In terIII8 of the 
          DOt.IaD. of the limi~ of a function,  .. follows: If,.,,., Pa, •••  _  & eequ.ae 
          of pointa In & metric ..,..,.  Band, E B then                         . 
                                              limp.  - 9 
                                              -
          if  and  only  if,  for  the  IUbapace 10. 1, ~. U.).( •... J  of  R  and  the 
          function  I: 11, ~, U, ... J -      E  liven  by  l(l/ft)  - p.  for  aU  ft-
          1,2, a, ... , we have 
                                            lim/(P)  - 9 . 
                                            ..... 
          Tbia ~~ _ euy to verify. AI& & matter of fact the notion of continuity 
          (or  the equivaleD~ notion  of limit  of  &  function)  ahould be  reprded  .. 
          fundamental,  with converpnt  IIeqUeDCeI  .. uaeful technical devicel.  in 
          lpite  of their  earIi .. introduction  in thia ted.  It would have  been mon 
          ·lnaturll".  althoqh  & bi~ loDpr.  to fiIR prove theorema about continuity 
          (or limita 01 fuDctioDI) and then the ~ a.ulteon  limite of lequencel. 
          Of ..... aU of our ideu .... IoIPcalI7 inteldepeadeDt.  aDd the followiDa 
          propoIltlon, wbleh .... a UIIful oriterioD 01 continuity,  could ....,  han 
          bem .... to lin &D alterDate cIeftDitioD of continUOUI function  (and beaee 
          of the 6mi~ oIa fUDCtlon) in terme of coovera-~ IeqUeDCeL 
          rr.p....... lAC E, B' .. tJUIric ."....  TAcrn • fwt,ditm I: B- II'  .. 
          ..........  ., PI E B iI •     .." iI,for..."  ~ OJ poi"" , •• ,., Pa •••• 
          "'B .. 1Aae 
                                          limp. - PI 
                                          -
                                          lim I(p.)  -/(p.). 
                                          -
               8appOIe &nt  that I _ continUOUI &~ PI and that  , •• ,.. Pa ••••  iI a 
          1IIlU- of paintilin  E that conv_  to ,..  We have  to abow that  the 
          .... -/~,/(H./(p.) •... conv.p8  to I(p.).  Oiveo  • > 0, the con-
          .....,.  011_ PlhnpIlt.  that tb.-e iI &. > 0 Rch that "(j(P),/(p.)             < • 
                                                             ,3.  OOIl'ftIlUl'l'Y  0. 1IA'ft01lAL 01'''''11011.      71 
           whenever  pEE  and  d(p, PI) < a.  Since  Pl, PI, PI, . ..  converps  to  PI 
            there ia a positive integer N wch that d(p.,  PI) < a for all 1& > N. Hence if 
           1&  > N  then  d'U(p.),'j(p.»              < I,  which abOWB  that 1(pi),/c'w,/<Pa), ..• 
            converges to l(po). 
                  We now prove that, conversely, if it ia true that whenever a sequence 
            PI, 'Pt, Pa, ••.  of points  of  E  convergeB to PI then  the  sequence of points 
            I (ps) , I C,W, I(p,), ...  of E' converges to I(p.), then I is continuous at JIo. 
            We do thia by supposing the contrary,  that ia that I ia not continuous at 
            PI, and deriving from this 888umption the existence of a sequence of points 
            PIt 'PIt PI, ••.  convcqing  to PI wch  that 1(p1),/c,t),/<Pa), ••• doee not 
            converge to l(po).  80 auppoee that I  is not  continuous  at JIo. Then  there 
            exiata lOme I  > 0 such that  for no number  a > 0 ia it true  that  whenever 
            pEE and  d(p, Po) < a then  nece88&rily d'U(P)'/(po»  < t.  Hence  for 
            any n = 1,2,3,  .•.  we can find a point  p. E E such that d(p.,  Po) < lIn 
            and d'U{fJ.),/(po»  ~ I. Since d(p., Po) < lIn for all n - 1,2,3,  ... , the 
            sequence  PI, PI, PI, ..•  converges  to  JIo.  However  ICPl), ICPt>, 1<Pa), ... 
            doee not converge to I (pO) , since d'U(P.),/(po»  ~ e for all n. This  com-
            pletes the proof. 
                                       ,3.  THE  CONTINUITY  OF RATIONAL OPERATIONS. 
                                                                   FUNCflONS  WITH V ALVES IN 1:-. 
                    Real-valued functiona on a metric space E (or indeed on any set) can 
             be combined in the usual way by the rational  operationa of addition,  8Ub-
             traction,  multiplication,  and division. ThUB if I, g are real-valued  functioDB 
             on E, we have the real-valued functiona I + g, I - g, Ig and Ilg, given by 
                                                   (J + g)(P) - 1(P) + g(p) 
                                                   (f - g)(P) - 1(P) - g(p) 
                                                        (fg)(p) - 1(P),Cp) 
                                                      (~)(p) =- ~~~ 
             for any p E  Ej in the lut cue II, ia of course not defined at any point  p 
             such that ,Cp) so 0, 80 thatllg is a function on (p E  E: ,(P) 7' O). 
             PropoaitiDn.            Lee I and g be real-tH&lucd /UftdUrn.. on G metric IJHIU E. 11 
             I and ,  are c:ontmuoua at a poi'"  PI E E,  tIaen 10  are the ItmCtion. 1+ " 
             I-"Ig  and Ilg, the laat under the proviao tAat ,(p.)  .. 0  (in  tllAim CCI8e 
             g(p) pi 0 lor aU poiftta p in aome open ball 01 center Po}. 
                    Thia can be proved  directly,  but it is easier to deduce it from work 
              already  done. By the lut proposition, to prove that I + , is continuous  at 
              PI it .ufIicee to show that if PI, PI, PI, . .. is a sequence of points of E that 
              conVel'leB to  Per  then  the  sequence 1(Ps) + ,(Ps), I CPt> + ,(pi),J<Pa) + 
             76      IV.  OON'l'lN1701Jll ruNCTIONII 
             ,(pa) •.••  converges to I(Po) + ,<Po). But the last proposition  implieB that 
             the aequencea 1(p1). I(p,). l(pa). . .. and ,(P.).  ,(,,),  ,(pa),  . •• converge to 
             I(po)  and  ,(pa)  respectively,  110 the  convergence of I(pi)  + ,(p1)./<Pt> + 
             ,(,,)./(pa) + ,(pa),  •.. to I (Po) + ,<Po) is a consequence of the proposition 
             on page 48. Exactly  the same argument  provea the continuity  at Po of the 
              function  I - ,. the function  I,. and  also (once a certain  minor  detail  baa 
              been verified) the function 1/,. The minor detail to be verified is the paren-
              thetical  remark  in the proposition  to the effect that if ,  is continuous  at Po 
              and ,<Po) pol 0. then ,(p)  po! 0 for all points  p in IIOme open ball of center  flo. 
              But since,  is continuous  at Po and ,(Po) pol 0 then  for all points  p in some 
              open ball of center  po we have 
                                                          I,(P)  - ,(Po) 1 < 1 ,(Po) I 
              which clearly implieB ,(P)  pol o. 
              Coroll4wry.  1M Po be a cluater poW 01 1M metrU: apac:e B cmtl let I cmtl , 
              be reakcIlued/tIttdWM  on e(PoJ IUCA UltJf 
                                                             lim/(p)           cmtl  Jim ,(P) 
                                                             ......                     ... ... 
                                            lim (f(p)  + ,(P»  - lim/(p)  + lim ,(P) 
                                            ......                             ............ 
                                            lim (f(p)  - ,(P»  - lim I(p)  - lim ,(p) 
                                            ......                             ......... ... 
                                            Iim/(p),(p)                    -   lim 1(P)  •  lim ,(P) 
                                            ......                             ......             ... ... 
               and, i/lim ,(p)  po! 0, 
                           ...... 
                                                                                 lim/(p) 
                                                          lim  I(p)  ..  ... ... 
                                                         ~ ..... ,(p)             lim ,(p)" 
                                                                                  ...... 
                       The coro1lary means. fil'Bt, that the left-hand  limite exist and,  second. 
               that they are pven by the appropriate  formulu.  It is an immediate  COllIe-
               quence of the proposition  and the fintt definition  of limit  of a function. 
               Lemma.  For eac.\ i ... 1.2,  ...• ".  1M fundion :1:0: E" -                                            R  dejinetl by 
               :I:o( (tilt  CIt.  • •• , a..»   -   CIi "  continuoua. 
                       We have  to prove  that :.:, is continuous  at any  given  point  Po E E-. 
               For  any  pEE- we have  p =  (:':I(P), s,(P),  ...•  :.:.(P».  The  inequality 
                1:I:o(P) -~) 1 ~ V (:':I(P) - :':I(Po»' + ... + (z .. (p) - :.: .. (".» .... dept P.) 
               shows that  if d(P. Po) < t!  then  also  1:I:o(P) - z,(Po) 1 < t!.  Thus  :.:, is  con-
               tinuous  at flo.                                    . 
                                                            13. CON'11I1UlT'f  or .... 110IlAL  0 ...... 11011.     n 
                  The previous proposition can be combined with  the  lemma to live 
           many examples of continuous  real-valued functions on Ea. If .e recall 
           that  any  constant  funetion  is continuous and  apply  the  propoeition re-
           peatedly, we see that  any polynomial in ZI, Zt, ••• , z .. with ooefticienta in 
           R  is  continuous.  (For  example,  ZI' - Za + ~ Zt - n-.  ia  ..  c0n-
           tinuous  function  on  E'.)  Furthermore  any  rational  funetion  ( ..  ratioD&l 
           function is the quotient of two polynomial functions) ia continuoua whenv .. 
           the denominator is not zero. (For example ZaZt/(ZI' + zI) ia .. continUGUa 
           function on E' - / (0, 0) I.) 
                  If E is a metric space and f:  E -               E" .. function, then the imap in lI-
           of any point I' E E is the point 
                                    f(p)  = (ZI(f(p», Zt(f(P»,  ... , z.(f(P»). 
            Thus I is determined by the n componen.l ~ z. 0 I, Zt 0/, ..• , z. 0 I. 
            Convenely,  an n-tuple of real-valued functions on a metrie 8p6C8  defines 
            a funetion from the metric space into Ea. The foUowinc propoeition IumdleI 
            all relevant continuity questions. 
            Proposition..          L« E be tJ metric IfNI" t.IftIl'/: E -             Ea tJ ~ 1'_/ .. 
            continuoua tJt tJ  point Po E E il mad only if eacA cmnpcmene /f,mI:JiIM .. 0 It 
            ... , z .. 0  I iI continuou. tJt p.. 
                   The "only if" part of the proposition comes trivially from the lemma, 
            for if' is continuous at Po then 80 is the continuous function of .. conti .... 
            function Zi 0  ,. To prove the "if" part, suppoee Z. 0 I, ... , z. 0/ eontinuoua 
            at  Po  and  let  e> O.  Noting  that  (z. oJ)(p)  - ZIC/(P», e,..oJ)CIJ)  -
            %t(J(P», etc., for each i = 1, ... , n we can find a a. > 0 lUCIa IbM 
                                           !%i(J{p»  - %tC/(Po»! < In 
            whenever I' E E and d(p, Po) < 8;, d denotinc the diatanee in B. If we .-
            a = min /a., ... , a"l, then if I' E  E and tl(p, PI) < • we have 
                                           !Zi(J(p»  - Zi(J(p.}) I < In 
            for i-I, ... , n, 80 that 
             v(Z.(f(p»  - ZI(J(Po»'1 + ... + (z.(f(P» - z .. (j(po»'1 
                                                                < .J(JnY + ... +(J-;ar-~ 
             This proves I continuous at p.. 
                    Note that the lemma becomes a special case of the "only if"  put of 
             the proposition when we apply the latter  to the identity  function on Ea, 
             which is known to be continuous. 
                                                     14. CONTINUOUS nJNCTIONS 
                                                 ON A COMPACT METRIC SPACE. 
         TIaeorem.  1Al B, B' be metric 1fItJCU, I: B-B'  G etmlinuoua ,"MUm. 
         TAM il B;, cmnpact, eo;' ita ;:",age/(8). 
              We muat show that if 1(8)  0::  (f(P)  : l' E BI is contained in the union 
         of a collection of open subsets of B' then it is contained in the union of a 
         finite number of these open suheete. 80 8Uppose that  (U,I'EI  is a collec-
         tion of open 8Ub8ete of B' whOle union containe/(8).  Since I is continuoua, 
         eMIl inverse imapt-I(U,)  is an open subset of B, by the first proposition 
         of  ,1. AIIo, for any  l' E  B we have I<P) E  U for lOme i E 1, in which 
         cue l' Et-1(U,),  80 that                          i 
         Since B is compact there is a finite subset J C 1 8uch that 
                                        B ....  V  t-l(U;). 
                                             iEJ 
         Therefore I(B)  -   V 1(j-l(U;»    C  V  U;. Thus/(B)  is compact. 
                             iEJ               fEJ 
              This theorem baa two extremely important  immediate consequences. 
         To atate  the fint,  let  ua eay that  a function I: B -  B'  from one metric 
         apace into another ie bountUd if the image I(B)  is bounded. In the special 
         cue that 1 ill a real-valued function on B this meane simply that there is a 
         number MER such that  I/(P) I :S M for all l' E B. 
          Corollary  I.  1Al B, B' be metric 1fItJCU, I: B -  B' a etmlinuoua/unclUm. 
         TAM il B ;, compact, I;' 6ot.mtW. 
              Reuon: any compact subset of a metric apace is bounded. In particular 
         the compact auheet I(B)  of B' ill bounded. 
              The lut reeult is falee if compactne88 is omittedj  for example, coneider 
          the function I(z)  - l/z on the open interval (0, 1). 
              If 1 is a real-valued function on a metric apace E and Po E E we say 
          that I  attaim  a  mazimum at Po if I(Po)  ~ 1(1')  for all l' E  E, and we eay 
          that I  oUGin.a a minimum  at Po if I(Po)  S /(1')  for all l' E  E. 
          Corollary  J.  A  etmlmuoua real«llued  lunction  Oft  a nonempt1l compact 
          metric aptM:e  oUGi", a mazimum  al eome point, and also altaina a minimum 
          al aome point. 
               For let B be a compact metric apace, /: E -+ R a continuous function. 
          'l1len I(B)  is a compact aubset of R, hence closed and  bounded. If E  ia 
         nonempty  then 10 ill 1(8), and the 1ut pIOpOIition of ,2 of the preceding 
         chapter  teUa us that I(E)  has a greateat  element,  and &leo a least element. 
         If Po E E ill choeen 10 that ICPt) ill the greatest  (least) element of I(E), then 
         I attaina  a maximum  (minimum)  at ,.. 
              Corollary 2 is falae if the compactneIB condition  is omitted,  eyen for 
         bounded functiona; for 
                                 example, conaider the function I(~) .. ~ on the open 
         interval  (0, 1). 
                   FloUD 19. A contiDuoU8 nal-valuecllunctioD  OIl a cIoeed interval 
                              in R attainI a maximum and a minimum. 
               If E, E' are metric IIp&eeI and I: E -  E' is a continuous  function  then 
          liven any Po E E and any e > 0 there existll a real number  3 > 0 such that 
          if pEE and d(p, pO) < 3 then  d'(j(P),/<Po»  < e:  this  is  just  a  literal 
          restatement  of the definition of continuity.  If E, E' and I are fixed it is clear 
          that a will depend on both Po and e. If Po is held fixed and « varies, then the 
          amaller we take « the amaller a will uaually be. If on the other hand we take 
          lOme  fixed  «> 0, then  a will depend  on the  point  Po.  As Po variee 10 in 
          general  will a, and it mayor  may  not be true  that  we  can  find  a  a that 
          works simultaneously  for all ,.. If it happena  that  we can  find such  a a, 
          and  can  do  this for  each e > 0,  the  function  I will have  some especially 
          nice  properties.  This leads  to  the  following definition. 
          80   IV.  CONTINUOUS  FUNCTIONS 
          Df'jinitilJn.    Let  E and  E'  he metric spal'CS, with distances denoted  by 
          d and d' respectively, and let I: E -+ E' be a function. Then I is said to be 
          unilormly  continuous if, given any  real  number  f  > 0,  there  exists a  real 
          number a> 0 such that if p, q E E and d(p, q) < a then d'(j{P),/(q»                 < f. 
               If it happens that a function I: E -+ E' is such that for a certain subset 
          S of E the restriction  of I to S is uniformly  continuous, we say that  J is 
          unilormly continuous on S. Thus uniform continuity on E is the same thing 
          as unifonn  continuity. 
               It is clear that a uniformly continuous function I: E -+ E' is continuous: 
          to check continuity  at a point Po E E just set q = Po in the definition. The 
          next theorem will state  that  conversely if f is continuous then J is actually 
          uniformly continuous,  provided  E is compact.  If E is not  compact  then 
          continuity  does  not  in  general  imply  uniform  continuity.  Here  are  two 
          examples of continuous real-valued  functions  on the  open interval  (0, 1) 
          that are not uniformly continuous: 
                (1)   The function I given by J(x)  =  l/x for all x E (0, 1) is continu-
          ous  but  not  uniformly  continuous.  Continuity  is  known.  Uniform  con-
          tinuity  is disproved by showing that  for any  f  > 0 and any  a > 0 we can 
          find  p, q E  (0, 1)  such  that  I p - ql < a and  11/p - l/ql > E.  Specific 
          such  p, q  can  be  found,  for  example,  by  taking  q = p/2  so  that  the 
          eonditions become p/2 < a, l/p > E,  the  pair of which will be satisfied if 
          0< p < min (26, l/f,  11.           . 
                (2)   The  function  I  given  by  I(x)  = sin (l/x)  for  all  x E  (0, 1)  is 
           cont.inuous but not uniformly continuous. To check this example we assume 
           that  the  easier properties  of  the  sine  function  are  known  (these  will  be 
           rederived anyway  in Chapter  VII).  Then I is continuous,  and  moreover 
           since  Isin (l/x)  I::::; 1 for all x E  (0, 1) any  6 at all will work if f  > 2.  But 
           if  f  < I,  no  a will  work.  For  suppose  that  0 < f  < 1  and  that  0 < a. 
           If we then take n a sufficiently large positive integer and set p =  1/(2111&), 
           q .. 1/(2rn  + r/2),  we get both  I p - ql < 6 and  IJ{P) - I(q) 1- 1 > f. 
           Theorem.        Let E  and E'  be  metric apace' and J: E -+ E'  a continuoua 
          Junction. 11 E ill compact, then J ill uniJormly continuous. 
                 It will be instr1lctive to give two proofs of this theorem. In e8.(~h proof 
           we start  with a real number f  > 0 and try to find a number a > 0 such that 
           if p, q E  E are any  points such that  d(p, q)  < a then d'(j(p),J(q»            < E. 
                 For the first proof we find, for each pEE,  a number  a(p) > 0 such 
           that  if q E  E and d(p, q)  < a(p)  then d'(j(p),/(q»         < f/2;  this  is possible 
           since f is ('ontinuous at p. Let B(p)  be the open ball in E of center p and 
           radius 6(p)/2.  E is the union of the open sets 8(p),  with p ranging over all 
                                                    14. PUJfC'l'lONB ON A COIIPACT ...... 0  BP.u.       11 
          the  pointe  of B. Since E is compact,  it is the  union of a finite  number  of 
          these open sets.  Thus  there  exist a finite number  of points  of E, I&J PI, PIt 
           .•. , p .. ,  such  that  E  ... B(PI) V B(Pt) V  ... V  B(p.).  Now  define  .-
          min (6(pM2,  6(Pt)/2,  ... , a(p.)/2).           We  claim  that  this  a  I&tiefieI our 
          demands.  For suppose that  p, q E E, with d(p, q) < •. For lOme i-I, 2, 
           ... , n  we  have  p E B(p.),  80  that  d(p" p)  < '(p,)/2.  Alto  d(p" ,) ~ 
          d(p"  p) + d(p, q)  < 6(p,)/2  + a :s a(p;).  Thus  d(p"  p), d<'Pl, I)  < '(p,). 
          By  the  way  that  6(p,)  W88  c~h08Cn  we  have  tl(J(p,),/<p»                    <./2  IIlCl 
          d'{j(p.),!('l»     < .. /2.  Therefore 
                    d'(J(p),!('l»     :S d'{j(p).!(p,»      + tl(J(p,),/(,J»     < i + i - . 
          and  the fint  proof is complete. 
                 For  the second  proof  we use tho indirect  method,  _mini  t.hM for 
          our  given  number  f. > 0  there  is  no  • > 0  IUch  that  if  ,. I e B  and 
          d(p, 'l)  < 6  then  d'(/(p),/('l»         < t,  and  we  derive  a  contndiction.  87 
          &88umption, for  each  n - 1,2,3,  ...  the  number  lIn  is not  a  auit.able 
          candidate  for a, 80  that  there  exists a pair  of points  , •• fa E  B auch that 
          d(p .. , 'l .. )  < lin  and  d'(J(p,,),/(q  .. »  ~ t.  Thus  we  have  a  aequence  of 
          ordered  pail'8 of points  (PI, 'll), (PI, /]1), (Pt, /]1), •••  wit.h the propertieI  t.hM 
           Jim d(p .. , q.) ... 0 and d'{j(p..).!(q  .. »  ~ f. for all n. Since E is compact,  the 
           .. ~ ... 
           sequence  p., '/h, pa, . ..  h88  a  convergent  subsequence.  Henee  we  may 
           rcphu'c the seqUCl\('C (Pit 'l.), (Pt. /]1), (Pt, 91), .•.  by a subeequenee  balDCh 
           a  manner  that  we may &88umc that  the acquence PI, 'PI, Pa, •••  eonverp. 
           to a point  Po E B, still  maintaining  the conditions 
                                   lim d(p".  q,,) ... 0,   d' (J(P.).!(,.»      ~ e. 
           From the inequalities 
                                    o :S d(q., Po) :S d(,.,  P.) + d(p., 'PI) 
           and  the equations 
                    lim (d(q., p.) + d(p., 'Pe»  - lim d(I.,  p..) + lim d(p., Jtt) - 0 
                    --                                    --
           it  follows that  lim d(q., 'Po) - 0,  80  that  the  aequenee  ft. fit fI, • ••  aIeo 
                                .-
           converges to 'Po- Thus  the continuity  of /  at 'PI implies that 
                                         lim/(p.)  .. lim/(I.)  == /(p.). 
                                         ---             ..... 
           For n sufficiently large we therefore  have 
                               d'(j(P.),/(Po»       < ;,  tl(J(q.),/CPo»  < ;, 
           implying that 
                d'{j(P.).!(q  .. »  :S d'{j(P.).!C'Pt» +d'(J(Pa),/(q.»              < ;  + ; - to 
           contradicting  d'(J(p.),!(q.»          ~ ·f.  This  ends ~ second proof. 
          •     ..,.  OON'lPfUOUli  J'VIfCI'IONa 
                                                              I So  CONTINUOUS nJNCI'IONS 
                                                      ON A CONNECI'ED METRIC  SPACE. 
          Tlaearem.       1M E, II'  lie meCric .,.,.,  I: B -         II'  a  continuoua lunction. 
          T_ if B if connedtd, ao if ill imtJ(Ie I(E). 
                To plOve ihie we may without 1081 of generalityaaaume that E' -/(B). 
          W. aba11aaauIDe that E' -/(E) is not connected and derive a contradiction. 
          Since I(B)  is not connected we can write I(E)  ... A V B, where A and B 
          an diajoint oonempty open subeeta of I(E).  By the firat proposition of t I, 
          each of theaet.a/""I(A),JI(B)  ill an open subset of E. We therefore have the 
          expl...wn of E as 
                                            E - /""I(A) V /""I(B) , 
          the union of two disjoint nonempty open subseta. This contradicta the fact 
          that B ill connected, proviDe the theorem.                                          . 
                                                                                   I 
                                                                                   , 
                                                                                  -1---
                                                                                    I 
                                                                                    I 
                                                                                    I 
                                                                                    , 
                                                                                    I 
                                                                                    , 
                                                                                    , 
                                                                                    I 
                                                                                    , 
                                                      • t t t 
           Corollary  (In,.,,mecflae.  ......  t1aeoNm).               11 a, b E R, a < b, And I it 
           • eonIifttIouI ....... ,.,., /tIttt:Wm em lite clotetl ifttmtGl [a, b), then lor anti real 
           ...... " ""'/(a)  _/(b) t1we __ CIt.least one point c E (a, b) I'IIda 
           IAaC I(c)  -  ". 
                 For since 10, b) is connected, eo is I([a, b». The  (almost trivial)  firat 
            pmpoeition of the Jut,  aeetion of the preceding  chapter  .tate.  that  ..,.. 
            00DneCted sublet  of R containa all pointe between any two of ita pointe. 
            8inoe "  is  between  the  pointe I(a),  I(b)  of I([a, b)), we therefore have 
            ., E laa, b». Thia proves the corollary. 
                                                                              ,6.  IIJIQUllIICIIII OJ' I'UIICftONI     IS 
                   Sometimes the name "intermediate  value theorem"  is applied to the 
            slightly more 
                                general statement  that if I is a continuoU8 rea.l-vallJ4l(i function 
            on a connected metric space E, then any real number that lies bet.ween two 
            points of I(E)  is itself in I(E).  The proof is of course the same as a.bove. It. 
            is worth remarking that  the validity of the intermediate  value theorem for 
            all continuoU8 real-valued functioll8 on a fixed metric space E is equivalent 
            to E being connected; for if E is not connected we can write E =  A VB, 
            where A and B are disjoint nonempty open subsets of E, and the theorem 
            fails for the continuous function on E which is 0 on A and 1 on B. 
                   The previoU8 theorem enables U8 to give many new examples of con-
            nected subsets of metric spaces. I<'or example, any continuoU8 image of an 
            open or closed interval  of R in another  metric space  (a "curve")  is con-
            nected.  We now apply this idea to show that  all (open or closed) balls in 
            E"', and  E" itself, are  connected:  If p .. (ai,  ... , a,,) and  q =  (b ,  ••• , bit) 
                                                                                                              1
            are points of E", define the line legment betuIeen p and q to be the set of points 
                          I (aa + {b - a.)t, ••• , a" + (b.  - a.)t)  : t E [0,1))  C E". 
                                       a 
            Since the component functioll8 '" + {b, - ",)t are continuous, the line seg-
             ment between p and q is a continuous image of the interval  [0, 1], h~ce is 
             connected. The distance between the point p and the point (aa + (b - a.)t, 
                                                                                                                 a 
             .• "  a. + (b,. - a.)t)  is  t  times  the  distance  between  p  and  q,  for  any 
             t E [0, 1], hence at most the distance between p and q. ThU8 the entire line 
             segment between the center of any ball and any point of the ball lies entirely 
             within  the  ball. Any ball in A'" is therefore  the  union of all line segments 
             between its  center  and  its  varioU8 points,  that  is the  union of connected 
             sets that all contain the center of the ball. By the second proposition of the 
             last section of the prec«ting  chapter,  any ball is connected, Since E" is the 
             union of all line segments  between the  origin and  its  VariOU8 points,  the 
             same reasoning shows that  E· is connected. 
                                                                       16.  SEQUENCES OF FUNCTIONS. 
             Definition.           Let  E,  E'  be  metric  spaces  and  for  n = 1,2,3,  ...  let 
             I.:  E -     E' be a function. If pEE,  we say that  the sequence /I, I., fa,  ••• 
             conuergu at p if the sequence of points 11(P), 1.{p),I,(P),  ... of E' converges. 
             We say that  the sequence of functiona la'/.,/"  ...  corwergu on E, or con-
             "",U,  or ia corwergent, if the  sequence converges at each  pEE.  If la, I" 
             I., ...  converges and f:  E -              E' is the function defined by 
                                                          I(p)  = lim/.{p) 
                                                                     -
              for all  pEE,  we say that /I, I" la, . ..  corwerge. to I, I  is called the  limit 
             lunction  of the sequence, and we write 
                                                              f  = lim/.· 
                                                                    ....... 
          1M    IV.  OOlft"lNU01Jll  FUNCTIONS 
                For  example, for each n - I, 2, 3, . ..  let I.: [0, 1) -+ R  be given  by 
          I.(z)  -  z - I:/n.  For each :e E [0, 1) we have lim 1.(1:) - z. Here the limit 
                                                                     .-
          function I is the identity  function 1(1:) - 1:. This i. iIlUitrated in Fipre 21. 
                                                                            I 
                       FJoUJlll21. The l8Cluenae of functioai/,,(z)  - 11& -    11&/,. OD (0, II. 
                 For a second example, let I.:  [0, 1) -+ R be given by 1,,(1:) .. 1:". Since 
           lim o· ... 0 if  Jol < 1 (cf. end  of  13 of Chapter  III).  the  sequence /1'/ •• 
           . -
           I.. . ..  converges to the limit  function I given by 
                                          I(z)  _ {O  ~f 0 S I: < 1 
                                                      1  If z - 1. 
           Notice  that  each -I. it continuoUi.  but  the  limit  function  it not.  Thi.  it 
           illustrated in Figure 22. 
                 If 8. E' are metric 8p&ceII  and  \he sequence of functions II. I •• I.. . .. 
           from 8  into B' converpl  to I. \hen  for any  E > 0 and any ,  E  E there it 
           a  poeitive integer  N  such  that  tf(J(P)./.(,»            < e whenever  n > Ni  thie 
           it a alight amplification of the previOUI definition. In general the integer N 
           depends  on  both  e and  ,. and  for a  fixed E we mUit take  N larger  and 
           larger  for dift'erent points,  if we want  the inequality  tf(J(P)./.(P»  < E 
            to  hold  for  all  n > N.  If it  happens  that  for any  E > 0  we can  find an 
            integer N that works simultaneoUily for all points,  E 8  then. as we ahall 
           Bee,  the convergence of /1. / •• /.. . ..  to I is especially nice in the aenae that 
            if each  pf the functions II. / •• I.. . ..  POBBeBBe8 a certain  kind  of property 
            (for example, continuity).  then 80 does the limit function I. This motivates 
            the definition on the next pap. 
                                                           I 
        D4r1i.uticm.  Let E, B' be metric..,...,  lortl  - 1, 2, a~ ... WI.: ..... B' 
        be a function, and let I: B -  B' be anotber fuDe&ion. 'l.'heIa tile ....... 
        II, I., I., ...  is eaid to c:onHrfC """...."  10 lif, atv- any • > 0, ..... a 
        poeitive intepr  N IUch that  tl(J(P),I.(P»    < ...........  > N, lor aU 
        pEE.                                    . 
             If  the sequence II, I., I., ...  con .....  uniformly to J we ........ 
        III.Y, for emphaais, that 11,1 .. 1., •.• con .... wniforntly to/_ .. If the 
        restrictions 
                     of II, I., I .. ...  to a certIiD ......  8 01 •  GOIIftIII uaifonqiy 
        to lOme function on 8, we.y that 1,,/., I .. .........  ~ _ B. 
              J'lova 23. Unif_  0IIII.,..... fIl .......  fIl ............... 
                        fl •  net  ftIWIIIt. 
        16    IV.  CON'IINU011ll  PUNCftONI 
              Unifonn  convergence  of a  sequence  of functions  clearly  implies  con-
         vergence. 
              The firat of our examples above, according to which lim (~ - ~/n) .. ~ 
                                                                      .-
         on (0, 1), is an example of unifonn  convergence.  For here d'(j(~),I.(~»  -
         I~ - (~ - ~/n) I-I~I/n ~ 1/11., and  this  Jut quantity  can  be  made  lellS 
         than any given.  > 0 by taking  11. > H, where N is an integer  at least  as 
         larpas1/e. 
              However, in our eecond example, which is the  convergence  of the  lie-
         quence of functions  z, zI, z:I, ••• on (0, 11, we do not have  unifonn  conver-
         gence. One way toahowthisis  to quote the theorem, to be proved shortly, that 
         the limit of a unifonnly  convergent sequence of continuous  functions il con-
         tinuoua.  Or we can  translate  unifonn  convergence  in  the  present  cue  to 
         mean that  for any  I> 0 we have:e"  < • for all ~ E  (0, 1), provided  only 
         that 11. il lufficiently  large, and if it happens  that  • < 1 thil  contradicta  the 
         continuity  of the function  :e" at the point  1. 
              A. before with sequences of pointa, 10 alao with 8e(luences of functions 
         it is important  to have  a  criterion  for  convergence  that  does  not  involve 
         foreknowledge of the limit.  Here is the relevant  Cauchy  criterion. 
                                     I 
         Propoe.tloft.     Let E, E' be melric~, tDitI& E' com",.,  tmd lell.: E - E', 
        ,  ,,- 1, 2, 3, ...•  Then 1M aequence 01 junctiom  II, I., I., . ..  it  tmilorml1l 
          ~ if and cmlll if, lor Oftll • > 0, II&ere it a poaWe inUger H eucA tAcat 
          if n CIftd m care i,.,.,. ".".,. tIacan N II&ea d' (j.(P) , I.(P»  < • lor aU pEE. 
               If the  sequence  I" I., I., ...  converpa  unifonnly  to I, then  for  any 
          I> 0  there  exila  a  poaitive  integer  N  IUah  that  d'(j(p),/.(p»     < ./2 
          whenever n > N, for all pEE.  Hence if 11., m > H, for all pEE we have 
               d'(j.(p),I.(P»    ~ d'(j.(P),/(P»  + d'(j(p),I.(P»      < ~ + ~ == •• 
          This proves the "only ir' part. We now prove the "ir' part:  For any pEE, 
          II(P),I.(P),I.(P), ...  is  a  Cauchy  sequence  in  bi'. Since  E'  is  complete, 
          thia sequence baa a limit.  Thus  the sequence of functions/a./I,  fl' . .. con-
          verpa.  Let /  be the limit  fUllction. Given  • > 0, choose the  integer  N  80 
          that  we  have  tf(j.(P),I_(P»  < 1/2  whenever  n. m > N,  for  all  pEE. 
          Then for any  fixed 11. > H and  fixed pEE the sequence  of pointa  I,(P), 
          1s(p),I.(P),  ..•  ia auch that all terms after  the NtA are within  diatance  1/2 
          oIl.(P),  and are therefore  in the clOBed ball in E' of center /.(p)  and radius 
          1/2.  Bince clOBed balla are  clOBed Beta, the  limit  /(p)  of  the  convel'lent 
          8eQWIDCe  /1(P),I.(P),/I(P),...     is  aIao  in  this  closed  ball,  80  that 
                                                                    ,6. IIIIQUUCIIIII CW FUIICI'ION1l   11 
          I(J.(P),I(P»  S t/2. Hence  if "  > N we ~ve I(J.(P),/(P»  < Ii for an 
           pEE, proving unifonn  convergence. 
           Theorem.         Let E, E' be meb'ic.,..  _  let 11, It, I., ...  be II uni/orml, 
          ~ aequence 01 COfttiftuoua /undiou from E i1&lo E'. Thtm limJ .. it 
          continuoua.                                                                            ..-
                 We muat  ahow that I - lim I. ia continuoua  at  each  point  po E E . 
                                                   . -
          80 let PI E B be fixed. Let  • > 0 be given.  Fix a  positive  integer  n such 
           that  I(J(P),J .. (P»  < ./3 for all  pEE,  which is poaible  by  the uniform 
           convergence. Since I .. is continuoua at 'Pe, there is a number  a > 0 such that 
           if  P E B  and  d(p, PI) < a then  d'(J.(P),I.<Po» < ./3.  Hence  if  pEE 
           and d(p, pi)  < a we bave 
              d'(J(p),/(pi»  S I(J(p),/.(p»              + d'(J.(P),I.<Po» + I(J.<Po),/(Po» 
                                                  e       e      e 
                                              <3+3"+3"-" 
           Thua I is continuous  at 'Po-
                 The above proof really ahowa IOmethiDl more pneral  than  is stated, 
           D&lDeIy that if we bave a sequence of fUncUODII/l, It, I., . .. from 8  into E' 
           that. converges uniformly  on lOme open ball of 8  or center  'PI and if each I. 
           is continuous  at Po then the limit function  is allO continuoua  at Pe-
                 If J and ,  are functioDII from a metric  apace 8  into a metric space E', 
           it is natural  to try. to find lOme measure  of the  extent  to which J and  , 
           diller,  that  is  to find  lOme lOR of  IIdistance"  between I  and  ,.  Fqr  any 
           specific p E  B we may 8&y that I and, differ at p by the distance  between 
           their  values  at  p,  that  is  by  d'(J(P), g(P», but  we  would  really  like  to 
           meuure  how much I and, differ over aU points of 8, not just at p. There 
           are  various  ways of doing  this,  depending  on the  circumstances  and  pur-
           poeee in  mind,  but  the most  simple-minded  method  turns  out  to be one 
           of the most uaeful. It is to take the distance  between / and 9 to be 
                                         max (d'(J(P), ,(P»  : p E 81 
           if t.hia maximum  happens to exist.  In order  to develop  this  idea  we need 
           to digreu  for a simple lemma. 
            Lemma.  Let E cand E' be metric: qacea,  and let I and ,  be continuoua fuM-
            tiona from E into 8'.  TAm u.. real-tH.dued fundion  on 8  whote IICIlue at on, 
            poi'"  pEE it I (J(p), g(P»  it contiftuoua. 
          88    IV.  CONTINtlOUS  ""NCTIONS 
                We must show that  this  function  is continuous at  any  given point 
          Po E  E,  that  is  that  I d' (f (1'), g(p»  - d' (f (Po) , g{flo) ) I is  less  than  any 
          given e > 0 for all l' in some open ball in E of center flo. But 
           Id'{f(p),  g(p»  - d'(f(Po), g(Po»  I 
              s Id'(f(p),  g(1'»  - d'(f(p),  g(po»  I + Id'(f(p),  g(po»  - d'(f(PO), g(po»  I 
                                              S  d'(g(p),  g(po»  + d'(f(p),/(po», 
         . the  last  step  being a  double  application  of  the  fact  that  the  difference 
          between two sides of a triangle is at most the third side. Since I and 9 are 
          continuous at Po, each of the  quantities  d'(g(p),  g(po»,  d'(f(p),/(1'o»                is 
          less t.han E/2 for all l' in some open ball ill E of cellter po, proving that  for 
          all p in that open ball 
                                  Id'(f(p),  g(p»  - d'(j(po),  g(po» 1< E, 
          as desired. 
                In the case of greatest interest, that where E' = H, there was actually 
           no  need  for  a  detour  to  prove  the  lemma,  for  here  d'(f(p),  g(p»  == 
           1/(1') - g(p) I and  the  continuity  of this  function  follows from that  of I 
           and 9 in two easy steps: the difference of two continuous real-valued func-
           tions is continuous, and the absolute value function on H is continuous. 
                 Now consider the set  tf of all continuous  functions from E into  E'. 
           We 88Bume that E is compact. Then it is true that  for any I, 9 E tf 
                                       max {d'(j(p),  g(p»  : pEEl 
           exists,  since any  continuous  real-valued  function  on  a  compact  metric 
           space attains  a maximum. Hence we may define, for any I, g E tf, the dis-. 
           tance between I and 9 to be 
                                 D(f, g) = max (d'(f(1'),  g(p»  : pEEl. 
            We proceed to show that tf, together with this D, is a metric space. 
                 For all I, 9 E tf, it is clear that  D(f, g)  ~ 0 and that  D(f, g) =  0 if and 
            only if I =  g.  It is also clear that  D(f, g)  =  D(g,j).  It remains to  prove 
            the triangle inequality, which states  that  if I, g, h E  tf then 
                                         D(f, h) S D(f, g) + D(g, h). 
            To prove this, pick Po E  E such that  D(J, h) =  d'(f(Po), h(po».  Then 
             D(f, h) =  d'(f(Po), hWo»  S d'(f{flo), g(Po»  + d'(g(po), h(Po» 
                      ::::;  max  (d'(f(P),  g(P»  : l' E  EI  + max {d'(g(P), h(p»  : l' EEl 
                      = D(J, g) + D(g, h). 
                             , 
            Thus  tf  is indeed  a  metric  apace.  It is  "abstract"  in  the  senee that  ita 
            "points"  are functions on another  metric space. 
             A sequence of points in the metric epace •  is a eequence of functioDi 
        11'/1'/1, ...  from E into  E'. This sequence will converge to a point / E. 
        if and only if 
                                      lim D(J, I.) - 0, 
                                      .-
        in other words if and only if for each • > 0 there is a poaitive latepi' N IUCh 
        that for any integer ft > N we have 
                             max 1d'(J(P),I.(P»  : p E Ht < I, 
        that i8 
                                     d'(J(p),I.<P»  < • 
        for all pEE.  ThU8 the sequence of points 1.,1., I., . .. of. CODverpi  to 
        the  point I E If if and only if the aequeoce of functions II, It. I., ...  on B 
        converges uniformly to the function I. 
             Suppose that a sequence of points /.,1., /., ..• of. is a Ceueh, aequeaee 
        in the metric apace •• Then for an, • > 0 there Ie a poaitive in ..... N IUOb. 
        that whenever ft, 7ft > N we ba~ 
                                        D(J.,/')  <" 
         that i8 
                            max (d'(J.(P),I.(P»    : p E Bt <" 
         or 
                                     d'(J.(P),/.(P»  < • 
         for all  pEE.  Aaaume that  E' is complete. Then the pIOpoIition of tbiI 
         aeetion  is  applicable,  and  it  te1la  us'tbat  the  eequence  of  fUDdioal 
                      •                               • 
                   11,1 .. 1., ...  converpa  uniformly OIl  B  to  8Om8  function I:B-B'.  The 
                    .,..mou. theorem teUe UI that I iI continuoua. ThUll E If and 
                                                                                                    8m/. -I 
                                                                                                     -
                    in the __ of pointe of the metric apace If. ThUi the metric space If iI 
                    complete. 
                           .  W. have proved the foIlowiDa .... t. 
                     n........  Lee B .. B' .......... , teiIA B com,., ..... B' coapWe. 
                     n. "'., 0/ all ~/wtt:IioMfroa B to B', teiIA IAe tliaIortt:e ...... 
                    _'-~/_,"'to" 
                                                                             max (I(/(P), f(p»  : "E BI, 
                     u • ..". .... .,... A ..... 0/,.,. 0/ IAU tMric.,...,..,.,.,.. 
                     if.."..."  if" u. ~ CIG....,.., ........ 0/ fwdiou ... B. 
                                 U II' - R we haft  the IDtRio .... GI all continuoua ...... ftlued 
                     fuDot.IoDII OR  a comPM' metric .... B, the diMaDce between two IUCh 
                     fUDCtloDlI and ,  beiDa 
                                                                              max ( I/(P)  - ,(P) I : ,  e BJ. 
                     ThiI metric apace iI impoa1aDt eIlOUIh to be cIeDoted by a atandard I)'IIlbol 
                     C(B) • 
                     ........... 
                         1~  n-.. the 00Iltiaui\J f1l the fuDetioD I: • - • if 
                                                            JO  if s<O                                      . 
                                 (a)  1(8) -                l. if. ~ 0 
                                                               •• !  if .. ·O 
                                 (b)  1(8) - {                             s 
                                                                           o 1.-0 
                                           ( .......  the ..... propIItIeI f1l the IiDe luactioo .... kDowa) 
                                 (0)  IC/I)- ...  ifs .. O 
                                                            1 
                                                                1  Is-O 
                                                                       lis luohatloa" 
                                  (cI)  IC/I) -                _,1     Is _ r, ....... , .... , .... ia ___ 
                                                            ~                          ,     with  DO  COIIUDOIl  divllon 
                                                                                             ott. tbua *1, ....  ,> O. 
                                                                                                                     PROBI&MIJ          91 
             2.  Let  E, E' be metric  spaces, 1: E -+ E' a continuous  function. Show that  if 8 
                   is a  closed subset  of E' then J-1(8)  is a closed subset  of  E. Derive from this 
                   the  results  that  if 1 is a  continuous  real-valued  function  on E then  the  sets 
                   (p E E: I(P)  ~ 01, (p E E :I(P)  ~ 01, tp E E: I(P)  - 01 are closed. 
              3.  Let E, E' be metric  spaces, 1: E -+ E' a function,  and suppose that  8,,8t are 
                   closed subaets of E auch that E - 8. V S. Show that if the restrictions of 1 to 
                   81 and to 8. are continuous  then /  is continuous. 
              f.  Let  U, V be (open or closed) intervals  in  R, and  let 1: U -+ V be a function 
                   which is strictly  increasing  (i.e., if X,1I E U and  x < 11  then I(x)  < I(Y»  and 
                   onto.  Prove that 1 and 1"1 are continuous. 
              5.  Let  E, E'  be metric  spaces, 1: E -+ E' a  function,  and  let  'P E E.  Define the 
                   oacillation 011 at p to be 
                         g.l.b.  (a E  R : there  exists an open ball in E of center  p such that 
                                                for allY X, y ill thill ban we have d'(j(x).!(y»                          ~ al 
                   if the  bracketed  set is not empty;  if the set in brackets  is empty  we define the 
                   oscillation of /  at 'P  to be the symbol  + 10.  Prove  that 1 is continuous  at p if 
                   and only if the oscillation of 1 at p is aero, and  that  for any real number  II the 
                   set of points  of E at which the oscillation of 1 is at least II is closed. 
              8.  Let  E be a  metric  space, 8  a aubaet of E, and  let /: E-+ R be the  function 
                    which takes  the value  1 at each point of 8  and 0 at each point  of e8. Prove 
                    that the set of points of E at which lis not continuous is precisely the boundary 
                   of 8  (of. Prob.  17, Chap.  III). 
              7.  Let  U be an open interval  in  R,let  a E  U, let  E' be & metric  space, and  let 
                   1: U - lal- E' be & functlon.  Define 
                                                             limI(x)  - limI+  (x), 
                                                             -+               --
                    where 1+ is the restriction  of 1 to U ("\ (x E  R : x ~ aI, and 
                                                             limI(x)  - limI_  (x), 
                                                             ~ ... -          .... 
                    where 1- is the  rel!triction of 1 to  U ("\ (x E  R : z ~ a 1 I  if these  limits exist. 
                    Prove that lim 1 exists if and only if lim 1 and  lim 1 exist and are equal.  • 
                                      ~                                      ..... +        .... -
               8.  Let  U - Ix E  R : x > aJ, for  some  positive  real  number  a, and  let I  be a 
                    real-valued  function on U. Define 
                                                               limI(x)  =  lim g(y), 
                                                              .-+-              ..... 
                     where  g: (0, l/a) -+ R  is  given  by  g(1I) ... I(l/y),  if  this  latter  limit  exists. 
                     Prove that  lim/ex)  exists if and only  if, given any  f  > 0, there  exists a,num-
                                     -+<0 
                     ber N such that if :t,1I E  R and X,1I > N then  II(x) - I(y) 1 < f. 
               9.  (a)  Prove that  v"i is continuous on I z E  R : z 2: 0 I. 
                     (b)  Evaluate  lim  :t -             1  . 
                                           ... 1  V"i-l 
                     (c)  Evaluate  !!'!!. 2.zI ~ 1  (cf. Prob. 8). 
            92      IV.  CONTINUOUS  FUNCTIONS 
            10.  Di!l('uM t.he continuity  of the function !: E' ...... R if 
                                       { _1_  if (x, 1/) '" (0, 0) 
                   (a)  !(x,1/)  =  x' +0 1/' 
                                                       if (x, 1/)  -  (0, 0) 
                                       {-EL  if (x, 1/) '" (0, 0) 
                   (b)  !(x, 1/)  -      ~ +011' 
                                                       if (x, 1/) -    (0,0) 
                    .                  {x1J'           if (x, 1/) '" (0,0) 
                   (c)  !(x,1/)'"         ~ +0 11' 
                                                       if (x, 1/) -    (0,0). 
             11.  Give a proof of the  first proposition  of  ,3 (on the continuity  of sums, prod-
                   ucts,  etc.  of continuous  functions)  that  i8 balled directly  on the definition of 
                   continuity. 
             12.  Prove  the  analog of the  first proposition  of  ,3 for complex-valued  functions 
                   on a metric space (cf. Probs. 20, 21 of Chap. III). 
             13.  Write  down  the  details  of  the  following alternate  proof  that  a  continuous 
                   real-valued  function!  on a compact  metric space H is bounded and attains  a 
                    maximum: If! is not bounded, then for"  - 1, 2, 3, ... there is a point p. E H 
                    such that  If (P .. )I  > ", and  a contradiction  ariaes from  the existence of a con-
                    vergent subsequence of PI, Pt, PI, ....  Thus!  is bounded  and  we can find a 
                                 of points ql, q"  q., ...  of H such that lim!(q .. ) -l.u.b.(f(p)  :p EEl . 
                    sequence                                                          .. -
                    A maximum will be attained  by! at the  limit of  a  convergent  subsequence 
                    of q., q"  qa,  •••• 
              14.  (a)  Prove  that  if 8  is a nonempty  compact  subset  of a metric  space H and 
                           'Po E E then  min Id(p., p)  : p E 81 exists ("distance  from 'Po to 8"). 
                     (b)o  Prove  that  if  8  is a  nonempty  closed subset  of  E- and  'Po E E- then 
                           min Id(p., p) : p E 81 exists. 
              16.  Prove that for any nonempty compact metric space H, max I d(p, q) : P, q E HI 
                     exists  ("diameter  of  g,,).  (Hw:  Start  with  a  sequence of  paira  of  pointe 
                     I (P .. , q .. ) \ .. -1 ........  of g such that 
                                             11m d(p., q.)  -      1.u.b. Id(p, q) : P, q E H\ 
                                             ,,-
                     and pass to convergent subsequences.) 
              16.  Let H, E' be metric spaces,!:  H -                   E' a continuous function.  Prove that  if H 
                     is  compact  and!  is  one-one  onto  then  !-I: E' -                      E  is  continuous.  (Hint: 
                    J sends closed sets onto closed sets, therefore open sets onto open sets.) 
              17.  Is the function  ~ uniformly continuous on R? The function  VTiT? Why? 
              18.  Prove  that  for any  metric  space E, the  identity  function  on E is uniformly 
                     continuous. 
              19.  Prove that  for any  metric  space E and any  Po E E, the  real-valued function 
                     sending any pinto  d{7Jo, p) is. uniformly continuous. 
              20.  State  precisely and  prove:  A uniformly  continuous  function  of a  uniformly 
                     continuous function is uniformly contin'ous. 
                                                                                                        PIIOBLIlII8      9S 
            2I.  Let S be a subset  of the  met.ric space E with the  property  that  each point of 
                   eS is a cluster  point  of S (one then  callI S denIe in E).  Let E' be a complete 
                  metric  space and I: S -+ E' a uniformly continuous  function.  Prove that. 1 can 
                  be extended to a continuous  function from E into E' in one and only one way, 
                  and  that  this  extended  function  is alao uniformly  continUOUl. 
            22.  Let V, V' be normed  vector spaces (d.  Prob.  22, Chap. III)  and I: V -                             V' a 
                   linear transformation.  Prove  the following statements. 
                   (a)  If 1 is continuous  at one point  it is continuoul  everywhere, and in fact is 
                         uniformly continuous. 
                   (b)  1 is  continuous  if  and  only  if  the  set  1 III (z)II/l1zll : z E  V, z .. 0,  is 
                         bounded. 
                   (c)  1 is continuous  if V is finite dimensional.  (Hinl:  Use a buiB 01 V.) 
                   (d)  The set of all infinite sequences of real numbers  with only a finite number 
                         of nonzero terms is a normed vector space if we define 
                         (ZI, Z., Z"  ..• ) + (III, II" 1/., ... ) -     (Zl + III, Zt + 1ft, Zt + II., ••• ) 
                                             C(ZI, Zt, :ra, ... ) - (c.zl, CZt, c.za, ••. ) 
                                     II (ZI, Zt, ZI, ... )11  - max { Izal, Iz.l, IZtI, ... 1, 
                         and  the  map  sending  (ZI, %t, ZI,  ••• )  into  (ZI,  2%t, 3%t, ••• ) Is a  0De-0De 
                         linear  transformation  of this  normed  ~tor apace  onto  itllelf that. Is not. 
                         continuous.                                          ,. 
             23.  Use Problem 22 to prove that if V is a finite dimensional vector space over II 
                   and  11111, 1111. are  two  norm  functions  01\ V  (i.e.,  real-valued  functions  IUch 
                   that  (V, IIlh) and  (V, 1111') are  normed  Vector apa.cea), then  there exist pcMi-
                   tive  real  numbers  m, M such that. m S IIzIlJllzU. S M for all DOnsero a E V. 
                   Deduce  that  any  finite  dimensional  normed  vector  apace  is complete  (u a 
                   metric space). 
             24.  Give another  proof of the intermediate  value  theorem  by completing the fol-
                   lowing argument:  If 1 is a continuous  real-valued function on the cloeed inter-
                    val (II, bl in R and 1(11) < 'Y < I(b), then 
                                             l(l·u.b.  {z E (II, hI: fez)  S 'YI) - 'Y. 
             25.  Give  a  proof  of  the  intermediate  value  theorem uaiDi  uniform  oontiDuit),. 
                    (Hint:  URing the  notation  of this  theorem,  uniform  aont.inuity implitl  that, 
                    given any e > 0, if we divide [a, 6) into .. auftloiently larp number of .. bbater-
                    Viols of equal length then for at least one 01 the division points,  we IhaIl have 
                    1/<1') - 'YI < e.  Choose a  sequence of ,'s corresponding  to .. sequence 01 ,_ 
                    approaching  zero, then a suitable subsequence.) 
              26.  Let  II, hER, II < b, and  let I be .. continuous  rea.l-valued function  on lo, hI. 
                    Prove that  if 1 il onlH)ne then I«(a, 6)  is (J(a),I(i))  or (J(b),I(a)},  wbiebever 
                    expreaaion makes sense. 
              27.  Show that if I: R -+ R is a polynomial function  of odd degree, thenl(R)  ··R. 
              28.  Show that  any open or closed interval  in E" is connected. 
              29.  A metrie space E is said to be 1IT1'tIr188 emmect«f  if, given any"  9 E If, there 
                    is a continuous  function I: (0, 1) -           E such that 1(0) - ,,1(1)  - f. Show that 
                    (a)  an arcwise connected  metric space is connected 
                    (b)  any connected open  subset of Eta is arcwiae connected. 
              M        IY.  CON'l'INUOua  rvNCl"I'IOH8 
              30.  Prove  that  a continuous  ~\.aiued function  on a cloaed interval  in gt can-
                     DOt be ODe-ODe.                                ,1 
              31.  (A apace-filling curve)                          t'                  ' 
                      (a>  Show tha~ the IUbeet 8 01 (0, I) consiatinl  of all numbers  having decimal 
                             expanaiona of the form 
                                                              .tJ.btca~.J) ••• 
                             (each Ga, 6", c. bein& one of the inteprs  0, 1, ., ., 9) is dOled. 
                      (b)  Show that  the real-valued functions  f'a, IPa, IPa on 8 which send 
                                                              •• a~ ••• 
                             into  the  real numbers  with decimal expanaions 
                                                    • tJafIttJI ••• ,     .6baba ... ,  • CaClC. .. • 
                                                                             a
                             respectively  are continuous.  (Note  that  each  number  in 8 has a  unique 
                             decimal expaDlion, 10 that  fPI, f'I, 'PI, are well-defined.) 
                      (0)  Show  that  there  are unique  continuous  rea.l-valued functions  la,I • .!. on 
                              (0, 1) whose restrictions  to 8 are f'a, IPa, IPa respectively,  which equal  ° at 
                              1, and  whieh are  linear  on each open  interval  in  e8 (cf. Prob.  5, Chap. 
                              III). 
                       (d)  Prove  that  the  function  /: (0,1) -                       BI  defined  by  I(z)  - (fa(z),I.(z), 
                             1.(%»  for all  z E  (0,11  ill a  continUOUIl map of (0,11  onto  the unit  cube 
                              I (Za, %a, z.)  E E' : Za, %a, :&a E  (0, 1) I. 
               32.  Show that  the sequence of functions 
                                              Vi,  vi z + Vi,  ..;rz-+-"-'=z=+=Vi==z, ... 
                       011 Iz E R  :  z ~ 01 is converpnt  and find the limit function. 
                33.  (a>  Show  that  the  sequence  of  functions  z, z', zI, ..•  converges  uniformly 
                              on (0, tJ) for any tJ E  (0, 1), but not on (0, 1). 
                       (b)  Show that  the  sequence  of lunctiona  z(1 - z), zI(1 - z), zI(1 - z),  ... 
                               convel'l811 uniformly on (0, 1). 
                M.  Is  the  Bequence of  functions  la,I • .!., .,.  on  (0, 11  uniformly  convcrj(Cnt if 
                                                       z                        '       u                                  u 
                                      I.(z)  - 1 + n,zt?  If I.(z)  - 1 + ,.it?                       If J.(z) - i + "lzlT 
                36.  Show that if the function I: R --. R is uniformly continuou8, then the sequence 
                       of functiona/(z  + 1),/(z + O,/(z + ~), ...  is uniformly  convergent. 
                36.  Does the Bequence of functions  z, ~, i, i, ... converge uniformly on R? 
                37 •  Let /a, /1, I., ...  and la, It, It,  ...  be uniformly  convercent  sequences  of real-
                        valued  functions  on  a  metric  space  E.  Show  that  the  sequence  la + la, 
                       /. + It, /. + It,  ...  is uniformly  converpnt.  How about la II, II 'I, I. It,  ... T 
                 38.  Prove that the limit of •  uniformly  convercent  aequence of bounded functions 
                        (from one metric apace into another)  is bounded. 
                 at.  Give  an  example  of  a  converpnt  sequence  of  continuous  real-valued 
                        fUDGtiona 011 (0, 1) whoee limit  function  faila to  be  continuous  at  an  infbIite 
                        awnber  01 pointe. 
          40.  W.,ie .,.<i, aDd for. -1,.,1, ... WI.: (.,i)-.  beuiDcnuiq 
                fuacb  (I.e., I.C.) S I.C.) if :I S ,). PIoft  tbM If .. eequeaoe 11,/ .. 1., ••. 
                COIlftrlll to I ta-I is ~, aDd tIIat if I is COIltiaUOlll then the COIl-
                 ....... UDifona. 
           '1.  w 1'/1,/ .. 1., ••• be COIltiauoaa real-vaIued functions on the compact metric 
                apace B, with 1- tim I..  Prove that  if 11CP) S I.CP) S I.(P) 5: ...  for  all 
                                         -
                ,  E B then the aequence 11,/.,/., ... COOverpll uniformly. 
           a.  Show that the cIoeed ball in CnO, 1]) of center 0 and mdiUl 1 is not compact. 
                 (H"": CoMicl.  the aequeoce or fUllCtions #e, zI, zI, •.•• ) 
           a.  H B is " compact metric apace aod ,. e B we pt " real-valued fUllCtion F on 
                 C(8) by I18ttiDa F(f)  -I{JI.)  for aliI E C(8). Prove that F is uniformly con-
                 tiaUOUL 
           ...  GeDeraliae Problem a u  folio .. : H B aod B' are compact  metric ap&ceI  and 
                 ,,: B -  B' .. "  COOtiauOUl function, map  C(B')  into C(8)  by I8Ddiq  each 
                IE C(B,) iat.o I 0  "  E C(8). Prove that this map is uniformly continuous • 
           .u. IAt B be " compact metric apace. Show that C(8) is a complete normed vector 
                 apace (cr. Ptob.22,  Chap.  III)  if we add it. element. in the usual way, mul-
                 tip1, them by ..... aumbens'in the UIU&l wal,  aDd take  HJU - max IIICP) I : 
                 ,  E &'1  for  aliI e C(8). Show that  the map of Problem .. is "  cootinuous 
                 liaear tnuaIIormatioo. 
           4.&.  Prove the ualog of the Jut tbeonm  of the ohapW  wbeD B is DOt compact 
                 but with a ..wict.ioa  to bounded COIltiauOUl functions, the cliataDce between 
                 two BUell fuDctioD8l and f  beiDc taken u              . 
                                            1.u.b.(cI'(j'CP),fCP» : p eBI. 
                 Do the aame tbiD& for bounded functions from &' to B' that are not DeCeIIIaI'ily 
                 continuoua. What is the relation bet.ween the two metric ap&cell1O obtained? 
   CHAPTER  V 
    Differentiation 
             The IUbject, of tbia chapter  is one-variable M. 
            ential  ealeub..  The  eIIeIltial  items, and  ..,.  tMlr 
            development,  are  familiar  from  elemet.t • .,  caIeu1ua. 
            This IfOUnd can ~ oovered with tpeed and pnaIeion 
            sinee all the difiicult work hM been doae in tile ..... 
            cedins chapter. 
            •        Y.  DIrn: •• N'IU'ftON 
                                                                 II.  THE DEFINITION OF DERIVATIVE. 
             lhdiftltlorl.          Let I be a  real-valued function  on an open aubset  U of R. 
             Let %I E U. We.y tbat I is dil~ at z, if 
                                                            lim I(s)  -/(~ 
                                                            ....        S-%I 
             exista. If it exiBta, this limit, often denoted I'(~, is called the tIeritHJliH 011 
             at %to 
                     We remark  to begin with that t;1 notion of limit used here is exactly 
             u..t of the preceding chapter,  since'                            a cluster point of the metric apace 
             U and  we are conaidering a function:ll'Om the complement  el%ll of  1%11 
             in  U into  the  metric  apace  R  (~y the  function  which UIOCiatea to 
             each 21 E el%ll the  element  (f(z) - /(z~)/(z - z.) of  R).  AIJ alwaYB, if 
             the  limit  exista it is unique.  Thus I'(~, if it exiata, is neceasarily unique. 
                     A clearly equivalent  definition of I'(~ is liven  by 
                                                 J'(~ _ lim  Jl%t'+ A) - /(~ • 
                                                               - ~,  " 
              Here " is tn"entood  to vary  in 10m. Open ball in R of center O. 
                     The"tion                                           ' 
                                                      lim I(z) .... /(~ _I'(~ 
                                                      .....       z-:-. 
              is equiv4t  to the existence, for ea4 I  > 0, of a number  3 > 0 luch that 
                                                      /(Z)  -/(~  'J'(~I S I 
                                                    I Z -z, • 
              whenever  21 E  U, z ,. So, and  121 ~zj < 3. The last  inequality  is equiva-
              lent to                                                   . 
                                        lI(z) -/(~ -1'(Se* - %I) I S 'Iz - Sel , 
              which  alao  holds  if  z - %to  No. ·.t if  •  is  taken  amall  enouah  and 
               121  -  %II < • then it is automatically"  that 21 E U, Bince U is open. Thus 
              we can .. y. somewhat  more briefly, tbat  the equation 
                                                       lim /(21) -/(z.)  -1'(%1) 
                                                       ....       s-z, 
              ill equivalent  to the existence, for each I  > 0, of a number  3 > 0 Buch tbat 
                                         I/(s) -/(~ -I'(~(z - ~ I S 1121 - %II 
               whenever Iz - Sel < •. 
                                                               11. DUlIII'IIOIi  01' DUlVA'nVB     " 
               Recall that & function .,: R -        B ia called linear if there exist numbers 
          c, A: E  R  such  that  .,(s)  - es + A:  for  all s e R.  We then have  .,(z)  -
          .,(z.)  + c(z - z.)  for any  :re E  R •• real-vaIued function on R sending 
          any z into I(z.) + I'(z.)(z  - z.) is linear.  It foll01fl that I it dil"'~ 
          at :re if and 0IIlJ ill ca IN t:loMlI ~ ,..,. :re br G liMClr /tmctior& 
          in  the __ that  then  exists & linear  function  tha~ ditlera  from I by & 
          very am .. l fraction of Iz -:reI  if z is sufficiently near:rei worded preciaely, 
          this condition  is that  there  exist  &  linear  function  I{J  8uch that  for any 
          e > 0  there  exists a  3 > 0 such  that 
          whenever Iz -:reI  < a.  I/(z)  - .,(z) I ~ tlz - z,1 
                                                                      ,  -/(z) 
           VlQu •• 25. Graph 01 •  fUDetion that  is differentiable at z.. Near z. the  graph ia very 
                        cIoIIe to •  eertaiD straight  line (the  "tanpnt  line at z .. z."). in the IIeIlBe 
                        indicated. 
           Pro"""ora.          Let U IN CUI open aubtet 01 R, I: U -        R. III it diJfere,&tiable 
           at :re E  U then I it continuous at z .. 
                 Pick any ft > 0 and then a 8uitable number Ie > 0 8uch that 
                               I/(z)  -/(z.)  - f'(z.)(z  --z,) I S  tvl z - z.1 
           whenever Iz - z,1 < a.. Then if Iz - %01 < Ie we have 
                  I/(z)  -/(z.)  I ~ I/(z)  - I(z.)  -I'(z.)(z  - z.) 1+ I/'(Zo)(s - %0) I 
                                             ~ (tv +  If'(z.) f) Is - :reI· 
            If,  for  any  e > 0,  we  choose  a - min (a., e/(ft +  11'(z.) f)1,  we  have 
            I/(z)  -/(z.) 1< e whenever  Iz - z,1 < a, pro~nl the propoeitioll. 
          180     ....  DlJ'l'JlUN'lU'II01l 
          lhrIbddoll.  Let /  be & .... -vaIued  function  on an open aubeet  U of R. 
          If /'(s.)  exiata for  &11  a:. E U then  /  is called  diI .... diable ""  U (or  Jun 
          dillIrfIftliablt).  The function/',  olten  denoted  tl//tk,  is called the tleriwtiH 
          all. 
                The notation  d//tk  (or  tl/(s)/tk)  baa many  obvious  defects,  but  at 
          least  we usually  know what is meant. 
                A differentiable  lunction  is nectlllll&l'ily continuoue,  but a  oontinuoue 
          function  is not  neceaaarily differentiable.  For example  the abeolute  value 
          function  is continuous  on all 01 R but it is not differentiable  at 0, ainee if 
          s"O 
                                     Isl-IOI         .l!l     {  1  if s > 0 
                                       s  - 0     -   s  -      -1  if s < O. 
           No limit  can exist  as s approachea  0 since any Op8n b&1I in R of center 0 
          contains  both  numbera INAter  than aero and numbera _                      than MI'O. 
                                                          II.  R1JLES OF DIFFERENTIATION. 
                 In very simple C88e8 it is easy to differentiate  (tbat is, compute denva-
           tivea)' directly  from the definition.  For example, if J is a conatant  function, 
           that  is il J(z)  - c for  all s E R, where  c is lOme fixed real number,  then 
           for any a:. E R we have 
                         J'(a:.) -  lim J(s)  - J(sO) _  lim ~ - lim 0 - O • 
                                    ....      :r:-a:.         ....  :r:-:r:e    ..... 
           If II is the identity  function,  that is if II(S) - :r: for &11 :r: E R, then  for any 
           zaER we have 
                         1I'(a:.) -lim  lI(s)  -1I(a:.)  _  lim  :r: -:r:e _ lim 1 _  1. 
                                     - ..     :r:-So          ...... :r:-:r:e   - .. 
           These reaulta are uaually written 
                                                de           tk 
                                              .-0, .-1. 
           For  more  complicated  functiona,  differentiation  by direct  1'8COUI'I8 to the 
           definition  is impractical,  10  special  rulea  are  developed.  The  followina 
           proposition makes  the differentiation  of rational  functiona almoet  mechan-
           ical. The fonnulas  lor differentiating  exponential,  loprithmic  and tripo-
           metric functiona will have to wait until  the next two chaptel'8, where theBe 
           functions  are given adequate  definitions. 
                                                                ,2.  am.. 01' DIJ'nIIIIII1U'1'IOM      101 
          PropoRtion..         1M I cmtl ,  be ~ ItIfIdiau em _",. ...,.,  U 0/" 
          111 cmtl ,  care di6ereMabit ,., 1M poiftC Z. E U, lAM • ... 1 + " 1- 't If, 
          cmtl, il '(%0) .,. 0,  1/,. TAN tlerivativel  ,., %0 are giNn '" 1M I~ 
                                  (f+ ')'(%0) -'/'(%0)  + (~ 
                                  (f - ,)'(Zo)  -1'(%0)  - (~ 
                                      (f,)'(~ -/(%o)(z.)  + ,(z.)/'(z.) 
                                      L)' (%0) _  '(%0)/'(%0) -/(~(z.) • 
                                    (,                         (,(~)t 
                The  proof,  to be given  shortly,  is by direct com~OD. The Omit 
          formulu  of the corollary on page 76 are wsed repeatedl)'.  The eont.iDai\y 
          of 1 and ,  at fit is also used, in the form 01 the .tatementl 
                                     lim I(z)  -/(%0),       lim ,(z)  - ,(z.). 
                                     -                       -
          In  the  ease  of  the function  1/"  the  888Umption that  ,(z.)  ,. 0  inIIuN 
          ,(z)  ,. 0 for all z in lOme open ball 01 center z. (by the eontinui\y of ,  at 
          z. and  the reeult on pap 75),10  that  it  is permieeible  to  I'eItrid  U to a 
          8Ill&Iler open  set  containing  %0 on  which  ,  is nowhere 1Iel'O,  baniBhiDl all 
           concerns about poBBible aero denormnatora. Now that we have given all the 
           I'eaaons for  the  v&iidity of the  formal  proo",  here are the  formal  plOOfa 
           themselvel : 
                         (f + ,)'(z.)  _  lim I(z)  + ,(z)  -/(~ - r<z.) 
                                            .....              z-z. 
                                         _  lim I(z)  - 1(%0) + lim ,(z)  - ,(!!) 
                                            .....    Z-%o             .....    z-z. 
                                         -/'(%0)  + ,'(%0). 
           The proof for (f - ')'(%0) is the same;  jUit replace each ,  by  -,. 
                           (/,)'(z.)  _ lim  I(z),(z)  - I(z.),(!!) 
                                         -..            Z-%o 
                                      _  lim (/(Z) ,(z)  - ,(!!)  + ,(z.) I(z) - I(N) 
                                         .....           z-z.                       Z-Zt 
                                      _  lim I(z)  • lim ,(z) - ,(%0) + ,(z.)  • Hm I(!)  -/(N 
                                         .....        --.      Z-Zt                    --.      z-,Zt 
                                      -/(%0)(%0)  + ,(z.)/'(z.). 
           To find (//')'(%0),  it is a little  easier to 8rat find (l/,)'(z.): 
                         (1/')'(%0)  - lim  (1/,(z»        -  (1/f(z.»      _  lim      f(~ 
                                         .....          z-Zt                   - .. (z-                  ) 
                                               lim ,(z)  - ,(z.) 
                                      -- .....          z-z.            __  (a-.)  . 
                                                 ,(~ lim ,(z)                  ('(z.»' 
                                                        ..... 
          Therefore  our final step is 
                U/,Y(z.)  - (J. (l/,»'(Zo)  -/(Zo)  • (l/,)'(Zo)  + (l/g(Zo»  '1'(Zo) 
                             __ 1(%o)g'(Zo) + I'(xo)  = g(Zo)/'(Zo) -/(Zo),'(%o) 
                                      (g(Zo»1           '(%0)                 (g(Zo»1 
          CoroUary  1.  II I  ill  G  retJH1Glued junction on •               open aubaBe 01 R mad 
          cER, tAm 
                This means, of coune,  that for any Zo E  R at which I is differentiable, 
           (cf)'(Zo) exista and equate cf'(Zo). This followa from the formula for differen-
           tiating a product,  together  with  the  known result  that  the-derivative  of a 
           coDltant  function  is 1eI'O. 
           CoroUary J.  For.y integer ft, dZ'/dz  "'" nz--1
                                                                         • 
                 It is undeJ'Btood that if ft  ~ 0 then  the function  Z" is defined only  on 
           the DODJI8I'O real numbeJ'B. The result is known if ft - 0 or 1. If ft is a positive 
           intepr greater  than one we repeatedly  apply the formula for differentiating 
           a product,  as followa: 
                        dzI       tI                dz        dz 
                        •     - .(z • z)  - ~ + ~ - Z • 1 + z = 2z 
                        dzI       tI                dzI     ;  dz 
                        •     -  .(21 • zI) - Z dz  -t 7            - 21 • 2z + sS - 3sI 
                         iJst     tI                dzI,  a 
                        •     - a (21 • zI) - ~ +,7 - z • 3sI + sS - 4s' 
                         dzI      tI                dz"         a 
                        di'" - di'"(s  .' sI)  -   ~ + ~ - z • 4s' + :r:t .. 5:r:t. 
           Clearly this ptocela can be continued  indefinitely.  Each computation  worka 
           out as above, giving at each stage the formula dZ' /a = nZ"-I.  This proves 
           the result for ft ~ O. If ft < 0, we set ft = -m, eo that m > 0, and complete 
            the proof with  the computation 
                                             til         tlZ'" 
            .,.     ~ 1 )             s-.  a  - 1 • di'              -mr-I 
            ". - C&\z;i'  -                    (s-)'            ==     sS.      -   -mz-o-1 - nz-l. 
                 The next result is the ao-called "chain  rule,"  or rule for differentiating 
            a  function  of a  function.  Informally  stated,  if "  - ,,(y)  and  y - I/(z), eo 
            that"  - "(,(21»,  then 
                                                                I a. IIIWf YALVII  ftJIOUK    _ 
         " ..........       LeI  U  _       v ". .". ...".." 01 R,  _             ", I: U- V, 
         ,: V-R'" fwtdtou. Let %IE U". .. IIuat I'(~ -                           I'(J(~) 'aUt. 
         T_ (g 0 I"(~ .. _ 
                                     (g 0  n'(~ - "(J(~)/'(~. 
          for all J/ E  V. Also 
                                  lim A(y, y.) ... ,'~ - A(YI, y.), 
                                   .--
          80 that  A{JI, y.)  is continuous  at ,..  Now let II. "'/(~,Y -/(z).  Since a 
          oontinuoua function of a continuous function is continuous, 
                                     lim A (J(z),/(Zt»  - I' (J(~). 
                                     -..                  . 
          Hence 
             (g .f)'~ _ lim ,U(z»  - ,(j(-» _ lim A{j(z),/(~){j(z) -/(tt» 
                            ....        z-_                ....             z-Zt 
                          - lim AU(z),/(~) • lim I(z)  -/(~ - I'U(z.»/'~ •. 
                            ....                     ....  z-_ 
                                                       II.  TIlE  MEAN V ALtJE THEOREM. 
          ",...,....          LeI I be " reakGl_  fwu:tiIm Oft Gft. OJHIA ""*' U 01 R IIuat 
           CIUaUIa •  ~ or " m ___ cIllhe poitit _ E U. Then if 1 ia diDmn-
           liable at Zt,  I'(Zt)  - o. 
                If I'(~ "0, there exiata a real number  a > 0 BUch that if z,. Zt and 
           Iz - Ztl < a then        /(Z)  - I(z.)  -I'(~ I < II'(~ I 
                                  I 11-_                       .  2         ' 
           that is, 
                       1'(-)  -   I['(s.) I < fez) - I(~ < I'(~ + II'(~ I . 
                                      2            11-_                         2 
          104     v.  Dlrn:RIINTlATlON 
          Since II'(Zo) I equals either /'(Zo) or -/'(Zo),  each of the two extreme terms 
          of the  lut  inequality  is neceBllarily either  l'(z0)/2  or  3/'{Zo)/2,  both  of 
          which have the same sign ul'{Zo).  Thus if z '" Zo and  Ix - z.1 < a, then 
           (J(x)  - I (zo) ) I(z  -  xo) hu a constant sign. But since I attains  a maximum 
          or  a  minimum at Zo, I(z)  - I(z.)  is always  nonpositive or always  non-
          negative for all z E  U, henrp, always negative or always positive if s ,. z. 
          and  l:t - rol < 15. On the other hand the denominator z - Zo can be either 
          positive or negative. Therefore we can find an x)l Zosuch that  Ix - z.1 < a 
          and  (f(z)  - I (ro) ) I(x - :to)  is either  positive or  negative,  whichever we 
           wish. This contradiction proves that the 888umption that/'(Zo)  ,. 0 is false. 
           Lemma (Rolle'.  theorem).               Let a, b E H, a < b, and lell be CI continUDUa 
           rt.al-t'alued lunction  on  (a, bl  that i. differentiable Oft  (a, b)  and  IUCA  tAm 
          I(a)  =  I(b)  =  O.  Then there erial.  a  number c E  (a, b)  IUCA tAm /'(c)  - O. 
                 For since (a, bl is compact, 1 must attain  a maximum at at leut  one 
           point of (a, bl, and also a minimum. If both  maximum and minimum are 
           attained  at  the  end points a, b then  since I(a)  .. I(b)  .. 0 we must  have 
          I(x)  == 0 for all:t E  (a, b), sO that/,(c)  = 0 for all 0 E  (a, b). In the contrary 
           case, 
                 I attains  a maximum or a minimum at some point c E  (a, b), and the 
           previous result gives /,(0)  = O. 
                 A slight generalization of Rolle's theorem is the mean value theorem 
           given below; Rolle's  theorem  is the  special cue  where I(a)  - feb) .. O. 
           The mean value theorem is illustrated  in Figure 26. 
            FlOUR. 26. The geometric ICnN! of the mean value theorem:  the P'&Pb of a dift'erenUabIe 
                         function  has at Ieaat one tangent  parallel  to any  chord.  Thie ie iUuatrat.ed 
                         for  ICveraJ function •.  The  bottom  curve  ahoWl how the  theorem falle K 
                         dift'l'rentiability  ia milling  at one point. 
           Theorem  (M4NUI _ue eIaeorem).  Let a, " E R. a < ". _  ,., [ ". a 
          continuoua real-t1alved jufld.ion  011 [a, b] III4t ;. tli6~ 011 (a, .).  2'AM 
           IAere ui'" a number e E (a,")  IUCI\ III4t 
                                           [(")  -[(a)  - (b - a)f(e). 
                 To prove this, define a new function  11': [a,,,) -              R by 
                                F(z)  - I(z)  - I(a)  - 1(11) -/(a)  • (:I: _  .) 
                                                                  "-a 
           for all z E [a, b). (Geometrically  F(z)  is the vertical  diatance ......  the 
           If&ph of lover  [a, b) and  the line lIeIIllent tbrouah  theead  poiat.l 01 thiI 
           IJ'&Ph.) Then  II' is continuous  on [a, b), differentiable  on  (., b), and rc..) -
           11'(") -  O. By Rolle's theorem,  there axist.l ace (a, b) such that 1"(0) - o. 
           Thus 
                                        F'(e)  - I'(e)  - 1(")  -/(.)  - 0 
                                                                 b -a              ' 
           provinl  the result. 
           Corollary  1.  II a  retJkaluetl Itmdion  [  011  em .. w.nal  i1I R  Au 
           _ivaliN  "'0 at each point, tIum I ia COMIaftt. 
                 We have to show that for any points a, b in the open interval  we have 
           I(a}  - I("}. Without  lea of generality  suppose •  < b. For lOme e E  (a, 6) 
           we have I(b)  - I(a)  ... (b - a)l'(e)  - O. Thus indeed I(a)  -/(b). 
           Corollary  J.  1/ I anti fI are real-t1aluetl jufld.iDM  011 an .. iIWncIl i1I R 
           tDAicI& Mve lite .. me _illative  at eaM point, tIum /_ fI tli6er 6rI a COftIIanl. 
                  For (J - fI)'  - J' - fI' - 0, 10 I - fI is COIlItant. 
           DftIift.doft.       A real-valued  function  011 a sublet.  U of R is called 
                     ir&cretuinrI)                                                  {  I(a)  S/(b) 
                    *idly iftereai,.,  ~            if, whenever a," E U                I(a)  </(6) 
                     ~ (and a < b, we have                                              I(a)  ~ 1(") 
                    *idlfI tltft:retui,., J                                             I(a)  > [("). 
            CoroUary  I.  11 I;' a ~juftJ:tion .. _.,. ..,.,.., i1I R lAst lot 
           a  poeitiN  (....,.)  ~ at .... poW,  .. I ;. ",...,  __ • .., 
            (atrldlr ~). 
                  For if a < ", then/(b)  -lea)  - (b - a)f'(e)  baa thuamuip  _/'(0). 
                                                         U. TAYWRtS  THEOREM. 
             Let  U ~ an open BUbaet of R, I: U - R a differentiable function. If 
         the function I': U -  R ill differentiable, we lay that I is ttDice ditferentiabk 
        and call (f)' the teeond derWaliH 01 I, writinl  (j/)'  88 /" or 1(2l. If /(1)  ill 
        differentiable,  we  lay  that  I  ill  til,...  lima  ditferenliabk  and  call  (j(I», 
         the IAinI tlilrVatitle 01 I, wriuns  (j(l)'  .. 1111 or I"l. Similarly for functioJl8 
         that are "  5, 8, • .•  times differentiable.  For  any  integer  n > 1 and  any 
         St E U we.y that I ill "  lima  ditferenliable at Zo if the restriction  of I to 
         IOIIl8  open ball 01 center  Zo ia (" - 1) times differentiable  and (j(II-l)'(St) 
         eDt.; we then write (j(-l)'(s.)  - 1(·)(St). ThUB I is "  times differentiable, 
         lor  a  given poeitive integer  fa,  il  and  only  if it  is  "  times differentiable 
         at each point of U. The ,," derivatiye 1(11)  of I is often denoted 
                                          If., _~ 
                                          r      ... 
              In the NIIt of tbia l8Ction "  will be one of the  nonneptive  intesera 
         0, 1, 2, ....  For convenience the Nf'O'A deriIH:IliN 01 G /fmt:lirm I is  defined 
         to be IWI - f. Recall that 
                                      "I - 1 • 2 • 3 ... " 
         if" - 1,2,3,  ..• ,10 that 
                                    (" + 1)1- (" + 1) • "I. 
         In order that the laat equation  aIao hold if" - 0, we define 01 - 1. 
         Lemma.  lAC U be CJft open sf&tervGl i" R and kI 1M IUftClift/:  U - R be 
         (" + 1) lima  ditferentiabk.  II lor CJftti G, b E  U _  ~1UJ R .. (b, G) E  R  b" 
         1M .,.,t'on 
                   1(6) _ I(G) + r(G)(b  - G)  + /"(G)(b  - G)I + ... 
                                        11                21 
                                              + I'II)(G)~ - .)" + R.(b, G), 
               For &Il7 ~ E U we have 
                 1(6) _/(~) + r(~) (b - z)  + /"(:&) (b - Z)I + ... 
                                        11                21 
                                                 + P")(Z) (b :t)1I + R.(b, ~). 
                                                                            1'- 'I'.U'O.' • .,..,....      117 
           For fixed b, each term  in tbia equation  is the value at s of a real-valued 
           function  on  U. Each  of theee functions  except the laat is diIIerentiable, 
           hence alao the  last.  Differentiating  both  aidea of the  equation  we obtain 
           o _ I'(s) + (I'(s)  tl  (b - s)  + I"(s) (b - s) ) 
                                    tk       11                    11 
                    + (r(s)  tI  (b - S)I  + /'''(s)  (b - s)· )  + ... 
                                 tk        21                       21 
                               + (tAl(S)! (b ~t)· + p·+I)(s) (b :Is).) +  ! R.(b, s) 
              _ I'(s) + (-I'(s)  + r(s) (b - s») 
                                         .             11 
                     + (-r(s)  (b - s) + I"'(s) (b - S)I) + ... 
                                        11                      21 
                                + (_p.l(s)  (b - s)-, + Ic .... "(s) (b - s).) + .!!.B.(b  s) 
                                                  (ft -   1)1                      ftl           tk' 
              _/c .... l)(s) (b :t)· + ! R.(b, s). 
           Theorem  (Taylor'.  theorem).                  1M U be "" open inlerval in R anti let the 
           /tIfu:litm  I: U -     R  be  (ft + 1) lima  tlifferentiabk. Then lor  ""11 a, b E  U 
           we"'" 
                     I(b) -/(G)  + .lJ!l.(b  - G) + [j&(b  - G)I +  ... 
                                           11                    21 
                                               + IC·)(G) (b _  G). +  c .... I'(e) (b - G).+I 
                                                      ftl             .      ft+l)1                   ' 
            Were e ia tome ftumber between G a.ntl b (or, if a anti b are equal, c = a). 
                  This is trivial  if G - b, 80 881ume that  G" b. We need to show that 
                                                         Ic .... l)(e) 
                                          R.(b, G) -     (ta + 1) I (6 - G) .... , 
            for IOIIle  e between a and b. Since G ,. b there is a unique real number K 
            IUCh that 
                                                                (b -;.) .... , 
                                             B.(b, G) - K  (ft + 1) I 
            The function rp: U -          R defined by 
                                                                     (b - s)·+1 
                                        rp(s) - R.(b, s) - K  (ft + 1) I 
            for  all s E U  is differentiable.  Furthemlor.e  !p(a) - rp(b) - O.  Thus  the 
            restriction  of rp to the interval  [a, b) (or to the interval  [b, oj if 0  > b) Batis-
           flee the conditionl  of Rolle'l  theorem.  Hence ,,'(c)  - 0 for lOme c between 
           G and b. Since 
                                "'(s)  __ /(rt+1)(S) (b - s)·  + K: (b - s)· 
                                                              ftl                 ftl 
           we have K - /(rt+I'(C). Thus 
                                                         fCrt+ll(c) 
                                         R.(b, a)  -     (ft + 1)1 (b - a)"'I, 
           88 W88 to be proved. 
                 Note that the C888 n -= 0 of thil theorem ill eII8etltially the mean value 
           theorem. There ill a little  more generality  here in that it ill not 88IUJIled that 
           a < II, but the 888Umption that I il differentiable  on an open interval  con-
           tainilll  G and b il coneiderably more Itringent  than the analogous COnditiOD 
           in the mean value theorem, where/W88  &88umed differentiable only beCween 
           a and b. However  it il not difficult  to get  a IOmewhat  more IODI-winded 
           ,tatement  of Taylor'l  theorem  which ill an authentic  pneralil&tion  of the 
           mean value theorem  (1188 lubeequent  Problem  15). 
                 The term  "Taylor"  theorem"  we have attached  to the above  reeult 
           iI a convenient  milnomer.  Taylor',  oriBinai ,tatement  w .. much  weaker. 
            PROBLEMS 
             1.  DiIIeuse the ditTerentiability of the function J: R -+ R if 
                                { Uin!        ih"O 
                  (a)  J(z)  -           It 
                                      o       ih-O 
                  (allUme the paeraJ  propertiel of the line function  are known) 
                                   zllin !  ih" 0 
                  (b)  J(:r) _  {         It· 
                                       o      ifz-O 
                  (e)  J(z)  -   v'lil. 
              2.  Let the  real-valued  function J on the open subeet  U of R be dUlerentiabie  at 
                  the point  _  e u.  . 
                  (a)  Prove that /' <I:t) _ = f(- + A) ;  [('" -1). 
                  (b)  If cr, _ e R, compute!:  /<-+ erA) ~ [('" + Ia). 
                                                                                                        ..., .......      119 
            3.  Here is a "proof"  of the chain rule: 
              (,0/)'  (%e) -lim  ,(fez»  -,(J(%e»  _  lim(,{J(s»  - ,(J<!e»  • I(z) -/<N) 
                                  .....         a - %e                _          ICz) - I(z.)                 :I -  .. 
                               _ 11m ,Wz»  - d/C .. » . 11m ICz) -/(." 
                                  .....     I(z)  -/(z.)            .....     z-.. 
                               - y(f(%e» 1'( .. ). 
                 ea)  What  is wrong with this "proof"? 
                 (b)  Alter thie slightly  into a correct proof. 
            4.  Prove  that  if I is ad ifferentiable  rea1-valued function  on an open lntemllln 
                 •  then I is increasing  (decreasing) if and only if I' it aonaeptiYe  (DoapoIlUYe) 
                 at each point  of the interval. 
            6.  AlBumlng the elementary  properties  of the tripnometrie  fUllC!tioDe, .., tItM 
                 tan z - z is strictly  increasing on  (0, 1r/2),  while the  functioD lin z ia II&rictIJ 
                 d~ng.                                                                                      z 
            8.  Prove that a diflerentiable  real-valued  fUDOtloD on R witb IIouaded dIrifttIYe 
                 I, uniformly  eontlnuoUl. 
            7.  Let  G,. e., G < ., and let I be a dllerentlable  rea1-vaIued , ......  caD .. 
                 opeI1  aubeet of •. that  eontaina IG, b). Show that  if .,. II uy real_her  be-
                 tween  I'(G) and  I'(b)  then  there  exiate a  number  c e (.,6)  ... tIIM .,.  -
                 I'(e).  (Hi"':  Combine the mean value  theorem with  the  lntermecllate .,.. 
                 theorem for  the  function  (J(z.)  -/(~)/(zl-~ on the lit 1~ .. &'t)E.: 
                 •  ~ Zl < %t ~ bl.) 
            8.  Let.,. e ., G < b, and  let 1"                  be continuous rea1-vaIued fuaetiou on 1-, II 
                 that  are differentiable  on  (G, .).  Prove  that  &here exiate a  number c e (.,6) 
                 such that               1'(c)(,Cbr- ,(G»  -,'(c){J(.)  - I(G». 
                 (Hint: Consider  the function 
                       F(z) - (fez) -/(G»(,(.)  -,(G»  - (g(z) - g(a»(fe6) - I(a».) 
             9.  u. Problem 8 (Cauohy mean value theorem) to prove the folJowlna ...... 
                 of L'Hoapital" rule: 
                  Ca)  Let U be an open interval  in H and let I and II be diflereat.iable ............ 
                        funetiona on U, with, and,' nowhere 181'0 on U. Let a be aa extnIMll.r of 
                        u. Supp088 that limJ(z)  - lim ,(z)  - o. Thea 
                                                -              -
                                                        I,   lJ!l      I'   tJ!l 
                                                        ~ ,(z)  - ~ yCz) 
                        if the right.-band limit  uista. 
                  (b)  &me .. (a), except that it is &IIWD8d tbat 
                                                 .  I'      1       I'     1       0 
                                                    :! 1(:1) - :! ,(:I)  -           • 
                  (e)  Same .. (a), except that  U - fa e. ::1> a' for IOID8  a e R·and  •  ia 
                        replaced  by the eymbol +. (el. Prob. 8, Chap. IV). 
             u.  Y. 1)I1'1' ....... U'1'IOII 
                     (d)  Same .. (c), except that it is aaaumed that 
                                                           lim  1            lim'  1           0 
                                                          -_/(s)  - __ g(s) -                    . 
              10.  State  pnciaely  and prove: An "  times differentiable fUDCtion of an "  times 
                     differentiable function is "  tiDies differentiable. 
              11.  Let I be a real-valued function Oil aD open I1llxlet U of R that is twice durer· 
                     entiable at StE U. Show that  if I'(~ - 0 and I"(~ < 0 U"(~ > 0) then 
                     the restriction of I to lOme opeD ball of center St attaiDa a maximum  (minimum) 
                     ats.. 
              12.  A ... ·valued function on aD open interval in R is caned COIIIIG  if no point on 
                     the UDe eepnent  between any two points of its II'&ph lies below the lraph.  If 
                     the function 18 differentiable, thia condition is kDOWD to be equivalent  to the 
                     ao*ntioD that DO point 01 the Ir&Ph lie below any point of any taDpDt  to the 
                     paph.  If the function  is twice differentiable the  condition is known to  be 
                     equivalent  to the eecond derivative of the  function heinl  nonneptive  at all 
                      pointe. State  tbeee coDditiODl in precise analytio terms and prove \hem. 
               la.  U. Problem 9(a) to Ihow that if 118 a real-valued function on aD open IUlxlet 
                      U 01 R that 18 " tim. dilerenfiable  at the point So E U then 
                                 I(St + A) - I(So) -I'(:co)  !  -I"(s.)  ~ -                          ...  - I'-'/(:co)  ~ 
                           lim                                             11                21                               (n -    1) I 
                            ~                                                        Aa 
                                                                                                         [<"'(it) 
                                                                                                      -      nl     . 
               14.  U. Taylor's  theorem to prove the "binomial  theorem"  for positive iDte&ral 
                      exponent R: 
                     (a + s)" _ a" + ncaa-IS + "(,, - 1) a...-a,;a + n(n -                           l)(n - 2) a.....aza + ... +;ca. 
                                                                   2                               2·3 
               15.  Show that Taylor's  theorem may be Itreqtbened  .. followa: Let I be a con· 
                       tinuous real·valued function on the olosed interval in R of extremities a and 
                       II that  Ia (" + 1) times differentiable on the open interval with these same ex· 
                       tremities  and I1lPpoae that  lim I'(s) , lim I"(s) , ... ,lim/III'(s}  exist and  that 
                                                                   ........                               .... 
                      1',/", .. . ,1'''' are bounded. Then 
                              1(11) -/(a)  + (lim/'(S»(II  - a)  + ... + (lim/III/(s»(11  - a)a 
                                                       _                   11                      ._                     "I 
                                                                                                         (II -   a)II+1 
                                                                                        + I'"+I/(C)  (n + i) I 
                       for lOme c between a and •• 
     CHAPTER VI 
     Riemann Integration 
                w. ctiIcuII in thia chapter  the  definition  uid  buio 
                propertiel of the Riemann intecral  for real-valued func-
                tiona of one real variable.  The integration  of functiolll 
                of eeveral  real  variables  will be  diacWl8eCi in  the  laat 
                chapter,  topther  with  some  finer  pointe  of  the  one-
                variable  cue.  Here  we  are  concerned  only  with  the 
                timplE8t reeulte, up to the integrability  of a continuous 
                function and the fundamental  theorem of calculus. The 
                detaila of the  proof.  will be  the  only  eeeentially  new 
                material  for most atudente.  In the laat section we apply 
                our  result.  by  living  a  rigorous  treatment  of  the 
                logarithmic  and exponential  functions. 
         111   VI.  JllllMANN  INTIIOJlATlON 
                                                  11.  DEFINITIONS  AND EXAMPLES. 
         Definition.     Let  a, b E  R, a < b.  By  a  partition  0/ the  cloaed interval 
         [a, b)  is  meant  a  finite  sequence  of  numbers  Zo, %1,  ••• , %N  such  that 
         a  = Zo < %1 < . .. < XN  = b. The width of this partition is defined to be 
                                max (%,  -  %i-I  :  i  -=  1,2,  ... , NJ. 
         If I is a real-valued function on [a, b), by a Riemann aum lor / corruponding 
         to the given partition is meant a sum 
                                         f I(x/){xe  - XI-a), 
                                         c-t 
         where %1-1 S x/ S x, for each i-I, 2,0' 0, N. 
              Thus, given any function J: [a, b) -       R and a partition  %e, Xl,  ••• , XN 
         of [a, b), there are lote of Riemann sums for / corresponding to this partition, 
         depending on  the  choice of Zl', z.', 0  •• ,  XN'.  In  the  special ease where 
         fez) ~ 0  for  each  % E [a, b),  each  Riemann  sum  can  be  considered an 
         approximation for the "area under the curve y = I(x)  between a and bit, 
         that  is,  the  "area  bounded by  the  x-axis, the  graph  of I, and  the  lines 
         x = a and x = b", as illustrated in Figure Z1.  However this geometric in-
          terpretation must not be overworked for at least  two reasons. First  of all 
          we do not want to restrict ourselves to functions that  are positive. Second, 
         our  arguments must  have  validity  independent  of  geometric intuition. 
          But  the  geometric interpretation  does  make  the  following definition 
          reasonable. 
          Dfflinition.    Let a, b E  R, a < b, and let J be a real-valued function on 
          [a, b]. We say that J is Riemann integrable on [a, b] if there exists a number 
          A E R such that, for any E > 0, there exists a 6 > 0 such that  18 - A I < I! 
          whenever 8 is a Riemann  sum  for J corresponding to  any  partition  of 
          [a, b) of width less than  6. In this case A is called the Riemann integral 01 
          /  bettoeen a and b and it isdenoted  f I(%)th;· 
               It makes sense to speak of the Riemann intP.gral of I between a and b 
          since A is unique, by the usual argument: If A, A' are Riemannintegr&1s 
          of J between a and b then given any  e > 0 there exists a 6 > 0 luch that 
          IS - A I, 18 - A' I < f  whenever 8 is a Riemann sum for J corresponding 
          to any partition  of [a. b) of width less than 6. There are partitions of [a, b) 
          of widt.h 1f'M than any pl'C!!l'ribed positive number since, for example, the 
          partition  by  N  equal subdivisions (with %i = a + i(b - a)/N  for i .. 0, 
                                                                                                   ,1. DanNnlOHI  AND UAIO'L1II                                  111 
                                                                                                        •                    t;rz 
                                                                                              ./ "                      /         i 
                                                                                                       "-            r.           1 
                                                                            7f                                         1          1 
                                                                                                                       1          1 
                                                                       ./          1                                   ,          1 
                                                               /1                  1                                   1          1 
                                                                                   ,                                    ,         1 
                                                                       1           ,                                    1         1 
                                                                       1           ,                                    1         1 
                                                                       1           ,                                    1         1 
                                                                       1           ,                                    ,         1 
                                                                       1           I                                    I         1 
                                                                       I           I                                    I         I 
                                                                       ~            I          I              ,         I         1 
                                                         G            fAI'  ,     fAI'  ,     fAI'            ,        ~ .. :             6 
                                                          I             I   I       '  ,                                                  , 
                                                          I                 ,            I                    I              I    II'  t 
                                                         ~. 
                                                                                                                                         ~. 
               FIOUD 27.  Area under a curve approximated  by a Riemann  lum. The iacUcated oboioe 
                                     of ,;,',2:1', ••• , ,;,' give\! a  certain  Riemann  IUm corrwpoodi",  ta the ...... 
                                     tition  2:1, fAIl, .' , "  ';"  and  thil  lum  can  be COJIIldered aD  apJ)l'Olllma&ioD or 
                                     the area  under  the curve. The maximum  (minimum)  value of the lUemaIua 
                                     lum_ for I corre_pondlnl  to the liven  partition  Ia liveD by the IUIR or the 
                                     &real  or  the  talleat  (Ihorteat)  redanp.  III  the  &pre  or  ....  let. .. J. 
                                     [ZI, z,l, "., [z., ,;.1, and  the  "true"  "area  under  Ute eurve"  m_ lie be-
                                     tween  theae  latter  extremea,  u  doea our  qnal  Riemann  IUM, ThUl  the 
                                     error  in making  our original  approximation  to the area  under  the eurve ill 
                                     at  moat  the  total  of  the  dift'erenCftl in  area  between  the  talleet  and  the 
                                     IIhorteat rectanglea.  It aeem8 I'l'uonable  that  if we divide (a, 6) iDta more 
                                     and  more pieCftl of widthp  approaching  JefO,  then  all our  Riemann IUIDI 
                                     will approach  a certain  definite limit,  the true  "area  UDder the eurve".  (Of 
                                     course the only way to make thil rigoroul ia to UIe thia or aDOtber prooedure 
                                     to  define  the  notion  "area  under  a  curve".  For  a epecifie eurve  the latter 
                                     notion  need not exist,  just u  limits do not alwaya exiat.) 
                1, ... , N)  has width (b - a)IN,  which is small if N is large. Hence we can 
                actually  find a Riemann sum 8  for f corresponding to a partition  of [G, b) 
                of width less than a, 80 that the two inequalities  18 - A I < ., 18 - A' I < • 
                hold. Hence  I A  - A' I < 2 •. Since • was an arbitrary  poeitive number  we 
                must have  IA - A'I- 0, or A - A'. 
                          Note  the  use of ~ in  [.' J(z)dz  as  a  "dummy  variable";  we oould 
                equally well have written  L J(t)dt,  or L' I (u)OO. 
                          We follow the usual convention of saying that I is, or is not, Riemann 
                 integrable on (a, b), and in the former case writing  L' J(z)dz,  even if lis a 
                 function defined on a larger set than  [a, b), by implicitly replacing I by its 
                 restriction  to (a, b). 
          lU  ~. IIDJIAIfIf  IIfftGBATlON 
                ExAMPLE  I.  I(x)  .. c, a  constant,  for  all  x E  [a, b).  Here  we  have 
          any Riemann Bum 
                 f/(x/)(s.  - s.-a)  -       f c(:c. - Xi-a). - C(ZN  -     x.) ... c(b -  a). 
                 ....                       .... 
          Since all Riemann  luml  equal  c(b - a) we have I Riemann  integrable  on 
          [ca, b), with  L'/(s)tk  - c(b - ca). 
                One of the principal  reaultl  of  this  chapter  will be that  if I is  con-
          tinUOUl on [ca, b) then  L· I(s)tk  exiltl,  that  is I is Riemann  integrable  on 
          [a, b); this  is trivially  illUitrated  in  Example  1. But  if I is not  continuoUi 
          then  L· I(s)tk  mayor may not exist, &8 is shown by the following examples. 
                ExAIiPLII  2.  Let E be a fixed point  of [a, b), let c E  H, and let 
                                          I(x)  _  {O  ~f s ,. E 
                                                     ells-E. 
          For any Riemann BUm 8 correaponding to a partition  of (ca, b) 01 width lell 
          than  •  we have  181 < 21cl' (the  coefficient 2 appearing  since E may  be 
          one 01 the partition  pointl s. and we may in this cue have both s/ and Zt+l' 
          equal to c.) 80 clearly r. I(s)tk  - o. 
                                   1   -----.,,--.., 
                                                     I 
                                                    I 
                                                    I 
                                                     I 
                                                    I 
                                                    I 
                                             •      •                     • 
                               l'Iavu..  Graph of the lunotiOll 01 Example 3. 
                 ElwIPLII 3.  Let. CI, fJ E [a, b) withCl < fJ. Let/:  [a, b) -         H be defined 
                                            {I  if x E (CI, If) 
                                   I(x)  -   0  if x E [a, b), x (! (CI, fJ). 
                                                                        11.  DllnNlTlON8  AND IlXAUPLIIS            115 
            Let :ro, %1,  ••• , %N  be a partition  of (a, b) of width less than  3 and consider 
           a  Riemann sum for I corresponding to this partition,  say 
                                                 8 - fl(%a')(x,  - X'-.), 
                                                        1-1 
            where X'-I :S %/ S x, for i-I, 2, ... , N. Sincel(xl)  is 1 or 0 according as 
            the point ~' is in the open interval  (a, ~) or not, we have 
                                                    8 - 1:. (%a - Z'-I), 
            the asterisk indicating  that  we include in the sum only those i  for which 
            xl E (a, ~). Now choose p, q from among 1,2,  ... , N such that 
                                             % ..... 1  S  a  < x.,  Xq-I  < ~ S XV' 
            Then  %a' E (a,~) if p + 1 SiS q - 1 and ~: ft (a,~) if i < p or i > q. 
            Therefore                   1:  (x, - ~I) S S S  1: (x; - X'-I). 
                                    ~1S;':Sq-1                             pS;S, 
            By the choice of p and g, ~ - a :S x" - X ..... I  < (g - p + 1)3, so that  if  3 
            is lufficiently Illlall  we lUust have  p + 1 S g - 1, in  which case the  last 
            inequality Bimplifies to                                                                      . 
                                               Z,_I  -    x,. S 8 S x" - X,._I. 
            Therefore 
                 (Xt:-I -    ~ - (%p - a) :S S - (~ - a) S (x, -~) - (X ..... I - a). 
            Since the partition  has width less than  3, each of the quantities  Xv-I  - ~, 
            z,. -   a, z" - ~, Z ..... l  -   a is of absolute  value less than  6. Therefore 
                                                     /8 - ~ - a)l < 23. 
             Since 3 was an  arbitrarily  small  positive  number  we conclude that  I  is 
             Riemann integrable on [a, b) and that  J: I(z)d:r;  = ~ - a. 
                   ExAMPLE  4.  Define I: [a, b) -                 R by setting I(x)  =  1 if x is rational, 
             otherwise f(z)  .. O.  (This  is  t.he rest.rict.ion to  [a, b)  of  Example  6.  page 
             70.) Any interval  in R is known to contain  bot.h points that  are rational 
             and  points  t.hat. are  not.. Hence for any  partition  .1:0, ~I, ••• , ~N of  [a, bJ 
             we can choose the xl'l  to be either all rational,  or all not,  in which case 
             the  Riemann  BUms  are  respectively  b - a  and  O.  That  is,  b - a  and  0 
             are Riemann BUms for f corresponding to any partition  of [a, b), 110 matter 
             what  the width. It is clear that f is not Riemann integrable 011  [a, b). 
                    In  the  future,  for: brevity,  we shall say  that  a  fUllction is integrable 
             on  a  closed interval,  rather  than  Riemann  integrable, and  speak  of  its 
             inUtlral instead of its Riemann integral. It should be borne ill miud however 
             that  there are other  integration  processes than  that  of Riemann, and  for 
                 theae other integration  procet!l8es our resu1ts mayor  may not be true.  For 
                 example the moat commonly used integral after  that  of Riemann is that 
                 of  Lebesgue. A given real-valued function on [a, bl  mayor  may  not  be 
                 Lebesgue integrable.  If it  is  then  its  Lebesgue integral  is a  certain  real 
                 number.  If a  function  is  Riemann  integrable  then  it  is  also  Lebesgue 
                 integrable and  the  two integrals are the same (hence can be denoted by 
                 the  same symbol  J.b j(x)dz).  But  many functions that  are not  Riemann 
                 integrable  are  Lebesgue integrable,  so  the  Lebesgue integral  can  be  of 
                 greater  use. For  example, the  function of Example 4 above is Lebesgue 
                 integrable; as a matter of fact its Lebesgue integral is zero, in line with the 
                 fact that in some sense the points of the interval [a, bl that are rational are 
                 relatively few in comparison with those that are not. We repeat for emphasis 
                 that  from now on integrable  means Riemann integrable, integral  means 
                 Riemann integral. 
                             ,2.  LINEARITY AND ORDER PROPERTIES OF THE INTEGRAL. 
                  Propoa.don.                      Riemann  integration ha. the jollowing propertia: 
                           (1)        Ij j  and 9 are integrabk  real-rlalued junptiona on the iflterllGl [4, b) 
                  Ihen j + , it integrabk on [a, b) 400 
                                                  f (f(x)  + g(x»dz  - J.b j(x)dz  + I.. g(z)dz. 
                            (I)        Ij juan integrabk  real-valued junction  on the intervCJl [4, b) and 
                  c E R then cj i. integrable on [a, bl 400 
                                                                        J.' cj(z)dz  -              c f j(z)dz. 
                            These  facts  are  easily  proved  by  looking at  the  various  Riemann 
                  sums, 8.8 follows. Given any  E > 0 there are numbers 810 8t > 0 such that 
                  if B , S2 are any Riemann sums for j, 9 respectively corresponding to parti-
                          1
                  tions of (a, bl of widths less than  8 ,6. respectively, then 
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                      St 
                                                 lSI -         J.' !(x)dzl  <~,  1                          -     f g(x)dzl < ~. 
                  Hence  if  xo, Xl,  ••• ,XN  is  any  partition  of  [a, b)  or  width  I..  than 
                   min (8 , 6.1  and  if  Xl', .•• , XN'  are  such  that  x4-15  %4' 5 %4  for  i - 1, 
                                1
                   ... , N,  then 
                   I ~ (/(%4') + g(x/)(xi  - %4-1) - (I.' !(x)dz  + I.. g(z)dz)1 
                                 ...  1 (    ~ !(%4')(Xi - X4-1) -                         f !(X)dz) 
                                                                                             + ( t. g(xl)(%4 - %4-1) -                               Lt 9(z)dz) I 
                                                        ,2.  UICSABI'IT  An 08.,..  PBOPIIII'IUII     111 
                   s I ~/(zl)(~ - ~-a) - f I(Z)dzl 
                                                          + I Fa ,,(~')(i, - z .... )  -     r. ,(z)dz I 
                        e      e     e
                   <'2+"2- • 
          This proves part (1). For part (2), given any. > 0 there Ie. number'  > 0 
          sut,h that  for any  Riemann sum 8 for /  correepondilll to any ,.ntllon  01 
          (a, b) of width leu than  6 we h&ve IS - J.' J(z)dzl  < ./lel (it iI permis-
          sible to restrict  our  attention  to the  cue e .. 0 if we note tbU  the ... 
          c - 0 is a triviality).  Then if Zo, x., ... , XN is any partition 01 ,fI,'} 01 wid'" 
          less than  6 and xl E  (Zi-l,  Zi) for i ... 1, ... , N we have 
           I t.1 cJ(~')(~ - Zi-t)  - c/.' I(z)dz I 
                               -lei' I t./(~,)C~ - -..s)  - /.t J(z~ < '.1· Tor ... 
          finishing the proof. 
                An  immediate  conaequence of  the  propoeiw.  iI tbM  C .....  the 
           hypotheeee of part  (1» 
                              f.' (/(z)  - "Cz»dz -        /.' I(z)dz  -   J.' ,(z,.. 
           This cornel from applyinl  part  (1) to the  rUlHltiona J....  -"  the IatW 
           being integrable by part  (2), with c -           -1. 
           ProJHMition.        11 I ill an int""rtJbl. real-tIaluetl ~ "" 1M ..""., fa, ij 
           oM fez) ~ 0 Jor aU Z E (a, bl, tlam 
                                                  f I(z)dz  t! O. 
                 For if we are given any. > 0 we may find a Riem&lUl BUm S 'or J en 
           (a. h)  such  that  lS - J.' I(z)dz I < eo  Then "r. J(z)dz ~ B - eo  a.dJ' 
           S ~ 0, 80  that  J. I(x)dz  t! -eo  Thia  heiDI true for .u • > 0,' we ...,. 
           f./(z)dz  t! O.                                                      ". 
           Corollary  I.  II 10M" are i,.,.",..,.  ~ ~ .... ......., 
           (a, h) oM /(z)  S ,,(z) lor all z E I •• b). lAM 
                                             Lt/(z)dz  S L· .ez)dz. 
                 For  Lt ,(z)dz  -      L· I(z)dz"  L· (,(z)  - /(z»u  ~ O. 
              lU  Yr.  IDIIIIAIIN  INTJIOIl&'l'I0N 
              eorou.". J.  1// ill (1ft  integrable real-vGlued function on the interval (a, h) 
              and m, MER are lUCIa that m S /(z)  S M lor aU z E (a, h), then 
                                                 m(h - a) S f /(z)tk  S M(h - a). 
                       For  /.' mcb:S /"/(*)tk:S  /.' Mtk,  and  we know that  for any  con-
              .taDt c we have  /.' = -c(b - a). 
                                                                                S.  EXISTENCE OF THE INTEGRAL 
                                                                             I 
               Lemma  I.  A reoJ.walued /unction 1 on the ifllcrvol  (a, h) ill  integrable on 
              (a, h) if and only if, ,wen afty e > 0, there aUt.  G ftumber 8 > 0 lUCIa thtlt 
               lB. - Btl < e tDltenever B. aM St are Riemann ",m. lor / correaponding to 
               partitiou  0/ [G, b) 0/ tDidt1t leBa them 8. 
                       First  suppose /  integrable  on  (a, h). Theil  given  any  e > 0  there  is a 
               , > 0 lOch that  IB - /"/(z)tk  I < 1/2 whenever S is a Riemann 8um for / 
               corresponding  to a partition  of (a, b) of width  leas than  8. If B. and SI are 
               two .uch Riemann  lOmB then 
                        lB. - BII-I (S. - J.' I(z)tk)  - (SI - J.' 1(:I:}tk) I 
                                                                                   St 
                                         SiB. - J.' I<*}tkl  + 1                         - J.' 1 (:I:)tk I <~ + ~- I. 
               ThiI proves the "only  if" part 01 the lemma. 
                        Convertely,  &l8ume the hypothesis  01 the ceif" part of the lemma.  For 
               ft  -    1,2, 3 •...  choose any partition  of (a, b) of width  1e88 than  l/n and a 
               Riemann  lum  8(11)  for /  corresponding  to  this  partition.  Then  8(1),  B(I), 
               B''', ... it a  Cauchy  sequence 01 real numben.  (l~or, by &l8umption, for 
               every  t  > 0 there  exists a. 8 > 0 lOch that  lB. - Bt I < t  whenever  B. and 
               Bt are  Riemann  101M  lor 1 corresponding  to partitiOnl  of (a, b) of width 
               1_ than., 10 if we choose an intepr  N lOch that  liN < a then  we have 
                IB(II) - 8(->1 < t  whenever  ft, m > N.)  Since R is complete,  the  sequence 
               B(I), Set,. 8(1),  •••  convel'les.  Let  its  limit  be  A.  Given  any  I> 0  now 
                choose • > 0 such  that  18. - Bt I < 1/2 whenever 8. and 8t  are  Riemallll 
               101M  for 1 corresponding  to partitions  of (a, b) of  width  lC88 than  "  and 
                choose an intepr  N  Buch that  18(N) - A I < ./2  and  1/ N  < •. Then  for 
                any  Riemann  Bum 8 for /  corresponding  to &  partitiQ"  of [G, bl of width 
               ... than • we have 
                         18 - AI-I(B - 8(N»  + (S(N) - A)I S IB - 8(NlI + 18(N) - AI 
                                                                                                   e         e 
                                                                                             ~2+2-e. 
                'nwa J Ie intepable  on la, b). 
                                                                  18.  UIftIIN .. O. 'l'IIJI  INftOlI4L     119 
                 A, tbie point  i' would  be easy to UI8  Lemma  1 to give a direct  proof 
           of the main result  of this eection, the integrability  of continuous  functions. 
           However  we  postpone  this  result  because  it is natural  to  wonder  what 
           integrable  functions  are like in general,  and the next lemma  and proposition 
           will give us a better  intuitive  und81'lltanding of the situation. 
           D.tIIlddon.         A real-valued  function  I on  the  interval  (a, b)  is  called  a 
           ., ~ if there exist. a partition  ~ ~I, ••• , ~" of (a, b) such  that I is 
           CODltant on each open subinterval  (~~a), (~l, St), .•• , (Z"_I, SN). 
                 For example the functloDi of Examples  1, 2, and 3 of , 1 are step fune-
           tiona. A step function  of more general appearance  is indicated  in Figure 29. 
                                                  , 
                                                   I 
                                                   I 
                                                   I 
                                                   I 
                                                   I..........,                , 
                                                   I     I        I 
                                                   I     I        I 
                                          ~ I  I                               r---t 
                                          I        ......,        I            I         I 
                                          t        I     I        ,            I         I 
                                          I        I     I        I             I        I 
                                          I        I     I        I             I        I 
                                                                                         , 
                                    PlQU....  Graph 01 a .... p fuoctioo OIl  la, ". 
            Lem ....  J.       A., fvrt,cnon it irttegrable. In particular,  il ~ Za, ••• , ~N 
            it •  partiUtM  01"'- interval (., b), if Cl,  ••• , CN E  R and if I: (a, b) -. R .iI 
            aucA 1IttIl/(~) - Co if z..-l  < Z  < ~ lor i-I, ... , N, tIum. 
                                            /.'/(s)dz  -     :t Co(~ - a:.-a). 
                                             •                i0oi 
                   Note  tbatthe  values  ol/(~,/(~I)' .. • ,/(~,,) have  no effect  on  the 
            intepal.  It is convenient  to place this lenllna  here, but ita proof could have 
            been given  much  earlier,  immediately  after  the  definition  of  integral  ill 
             ,1. However it is mOlt simplo to base the  proof  011  Examples  2  and  3  of 
             ,1 and  the first  proposition  of t 2, &II follows: 
          110    VI,  IUBIlANN  IIITB01U.TJON 
          For i-I, 2, ' ,"  N define 1('1: (a, bl- R by 
                                         { I  if  Z E (~I' iii) 
                               ~z) -      0  if  z E (a, bl, z ~ (~l, z.). 
          Then / - t CIfP4 is a function  on [a, b) that  takas on the value aero at all 
                      W             . 
          pointe  except pcaibly  the  pointe  :eo, Zl,  ••• , ZN;  hence  it is the  IUDl  of a 
          Anita number  of functiollll of the  type  of Example  2 of  ,1.  By Example 
          2, topther  with  the linearity  of the integral,  we have 
                                     L' V(Z)  - ~ CIfP4(z»a - o. 
          But each ~ is a function  of the  type of Example  3 of ,1, hence is inta-
          gn,bie,  with  L' ~ ... :Ii  -  ~I' Again using the linearity  of the integral  we 
          get 1- V - t ~ ) + t ~ integrable  and 
                           W              (001 
                      L'/(e)d:e  -   L'V(z) - !r CIfP4(z»)a + !r c, L' .,.(:e)d:e 
                                  -t c,(1Ii - ~).                        ' 
                                     W 
                For an illustration  of the situation  of the following propoeition, where a 
          function is sandwiched between two step functiollll, see Figure 'n (pap 113). 
           'ropoaidoR.        TIM real-wluetl IUMUm I on t1&e inIm1tJl (a, b) u intfJgrabltl 
          on (a, b) il tmd onlrI if, lor eacA e > 0, tAm eNt "", /1mdioM II, /. on [IJ, b) 
           auc:1& tIuJt 
                                !t(z)  S I(z)  S I,(z)     lor «ICIa z E (a, b) 
                                          L' V.(z)  - /1(Z»d:e < eo 
                We first  prove  that  if the  given  condition  holds then I is integrable. 
           We use the criterion  of Lemma 1. Given.  > 0 we have to produce a' > 0 
           8uch that  if Bio B, are Riemann  8UIll8 for I corresponding  to partitiollll  of 
           (a, b) of width  less than'  t.hen  18 - B,I < •. Use the  hypoth.s  to find 
                                                      1 
           step  functiollll/   I, on [a, b) such  that 
                              l , 
                                 II(z)  S /(z)  S I,(z)     for ail z E [a, b) 
           and                           L' V,(z)  - II(s»tk  < ;. 
                                                                     ,3.  DJft'SIfCII  OP 'l'IIJI .........     111 
           Since "". are integrable  on [IJ, b) we can  find a ,  > 0 auch that ..., Rie-
           mann sum for "  (or /~ colTMpondinl to any partition  of (0, b) of wid~ 1_ 
           than  ,  ditYel'8 in  abeolute  value  from  J.' ,,(z).  (or  J.. 1aC..)d:e) by 1_ 
           than  ./3.  Now let 8 be any Riemann sum for' correepondiq  to & partition 
           of [/I, b) of width  Ieee than  'i say  that  Zt, ZI,  ••• , ZII  ia tbia partition  and 
           that 8 - t ,(%l)(%4 - Zi-I),  where Zi-I ~ %4' ~ Z4 for each i-I, .. " N, 
                          '-I 
           Then since 
                                        II(z)  S I(:c) ~ I.(:c)  for :c E (/I, b) 
            we have             t I,(:c.')(zi - ~,) S 8 S  t /t(Z4')(Z4 - ~.). 
                                 ;..a                                  '-I 
            By our choice of ,  we have 
                                    I 6"(%4')(%4 -~.) - J.' 11(:c)d:e1 < t 
            and 
            implying 
                                     J.' II(:C).  -     ;   < 8 < J.' 1aC.:c'" + ; : 
            Thus 8 belonp  to a fixed open interval 
                                       (J.' 11(:c)d:e -      ;,  J.' I.(:c).  + ;) 
            oflengtb         f      I'll               ()           •  •  •  • 
                            T+.~OO-"~·+T<T+T+r-~ 
            If 8"  8. are  two  Riemann  surne for ,  co1'l't!llpOndiDl to putt ... of fa. ij 
            of width  Ieee than  "  then  each 81, Bt win belon& to the ... interYal, 10 
            that  18 - 8 l < f. ThiJ is what we wiabed to show, 10 half thepJUpCllitioa 
                       1      t
            is proved. 
                   To prove the remaining half of the propolition,  we It&It wi~ .. ill'" 
            grable  function  I: (/I, b) -        R  and  &  fixed  f  > 0  and we have  to pJOduee 
            step  functions  "". with  the  deeired propertia  Uai. Lemma  l,we  CIlIa 
            find a partition  ~ z"  ' •. , ZII  of (/I, b)euch  that  &OJ' two Riemum _ 
            for /  correepondinl  to this partition  differ in abiIoIute value by 1_ tbaa .. , 
            whenl .. ia lOme arbitrary  fixed poIitive  number  Ie. than ~ That ill, for 
            arbitrar,y %4', %4" E  [Zi-Io %4), i-I, ., ., N. we have 
                                       I 6 (J(%4') - 1(:cl'»(Z4 - ZI-..) 1< e'. 
           tI we apply tbia inequality to the special cue where, for lOme fixed index 
           i-I, ... , N, we have al- al' if. "i and Zj" - Zj, we get 
           implJinl                        I/~l) I < S, ! SI-I  + I/(s/) I. 
           Thia Ian  inequality  hola for all  Zj' E I~ Zj).  Thua I  ia  bounded on 
            lZi-I' Zj). Therefore I ia bounded on aU of 1.,6). Thua for.  - I, .,., N  we 
           cande6ne 
                                        me - ,.I.b. lI(sl)  : ~' E [z...., ~JI 
                                       M, -1.u,b,II(~') : ~' e Iz...., ~JI 
            and we can define atap functiona I., lion (., 6) by 
                                                                if ~. < z < ~"  - I, ... , N 
                                                                if s  -  ~"  - 0, I, , .. , N 
                                                                ifZ4-l<s<~,i-l, ... ,N 
                                                                if s - ~, i - 0, 1, , , "  N. 
            Clearly II(s)  ~ I(z)  ~ I.(s)  for all s e [., 6), and  the  proof will be CORl-
            plete if we can .how  that  L' CI.(s) - II(s»cb  < .. To do  tbia,  for any 
            real  number tt > 0 find .pacific ~',~" e (Z4-I, ~), , ... I, ... , N,  10 that 
                                         I(~,) < me + tt,  I(~'') > M, - ". 
            Then 
                   ••                                               • 
                   1: U(~") - I(~,»(~ - ~a> > 1: (M, - '"' - 2,,)(~ - ~-a> 
                    w                                             -a 
                                                              -L' U.(s) - I.(z»cb  - 2,,(b - .), 
                                       I ~ U(~') -/(~"»(~ - Z4-a> I < , 
            we have 
            ..                         L' Uh) - 11~»cb < , + 2,,(b - .), 
                                             ,'- rutfDAdl!lTAL  TllmUM 01' CALCULVS    US 
         Since"  wu ony positive number,  we have 
                                  /.' (J.(~) - Il(~»" S .' < " 
         and the proof is complete. 
              The foUowinc reeuit, which occurred in the COUl'8e of the proof of the 
         proposition, ia a trivial  conaequence of the propoaition itself. 
         Corollary.     II 1M NtJl..tHJ11Ultl /unction  I  07&  (a, b]  ill  integrable 07&  la, b), 
         tAm it iB bounded 07& (a, h]. 
         TluJorem.      II I  iB a  continU0U8 real-valued lunction on the interval la, bl 
         tAm /.' I(z)tk  e:eiBU. 
              We ahall  prove  this  theorenl  by  showing  that  the  criterion  of  the 
         praoedinc proposition  obtains.  Since I  ill wliformJy (."OutinuoUB on  (a, bl, 
         given  any  e > 0  we can  find a  ,  > 0 such  that  whenever  ~', ~" E  [a, II) 
         and  I~' - ~'I < 'then  I/(z')  - l(z")1  < _/(b - a). Chooee any  partition 
         Zt, ~l, ••• , s" of (a, b] of width  less than  ,.  {I'or each i  = 1, ... , N  choose 
         #&e', #&e" E (~""l' s;) .such that  the restriction  of I to (4-1, Zi] attaillB a mini-
         mum at #&e' and a maximum at #&e". Define step  funCtiOllB II. Is on (a, b] by 
                        Il(~) _  J/«~)')  if Z .... l  < s  < #&e, i ... 1, •.. , N 
                                11 .,     if z - Zi, i - 0, 1, ..• , N. 
                        /.(s)  _  JI«~i)'')  if z....l  < Z  < Zi,  i-I,  ... , N 
                                 11...    if ~ - #&e,i - 0,1,  .•. ,N. 
          Then Il(z)  S I(z)  S I.(s)  for  all s E (a, b].  Furthermore  for  each  i =  1, 
          ... , N  we  have  l#&e' - zrl S x, - X,-l  <',  110  that  If(x.') - f(oI:,")I < 
          _/(b - a) and therefore f.(%) - fl(x)  < ./(b  - a) for all x E  [a, b]. There-
          fore 
                /.' (J.(z) -/l(X»tk  S max 1I.(z) - /&(z) : z E (a, b1l • (b - a) 
                                       < -b _     • (b - a) == •• 
                                             -a 
          1'hua the criterion of the Jut proposition is satisfied. 
                              I".  THE  FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM  OF CALCULUS. 
          Prop08"I0",.     Let a, b, c E  ft,  a < h < c, and let / be a real-valued /unction 
          on [a, c). TAen /  i. integrable 07&  [a, c) i/ and 07&111 if it ill integrable on both 
          [a, b) and [b, e], in umich caN 
                                J.' I(z)"  + L" I(z)"  - J." I(z)rb. 
           1M  VI,  JUmlANIi  IIIT11OBATlOIi 
                 It is r.onvenient to use the proposition of the precedinS eection, If / i. 
           intepable  on  both  (4, b) and  (b, e), then  for any  e > 0 we can  find etep 
           functioDl A. and lit on (a, b] and k. and kt on (b, e] such that 
                                  A.(z) S fez)  S  lIt(z)  for each z E [a, b) 
                                  k.(z) S fez)  S  kt(z)         for each z E [b, 0] 
           with I.' (1at(z) - A.(z) )a, I.' (kt(z)  - k.(z»a  each 1_ than t/2. 
           Define lunctioDl /., /. on [a, e] .by 
                                                     { 1&.(21)   if 4  S z S b 
                                          /.(21)"       k.(z)  ifb<zSe 
                                          /.(z)  .. {~~:~  ifaSzSb 
                                                                 ilb<zSc. 
           Then /l~ /. are Rep IunctiOlll, 
                                     /.(z) S /(21) S /.(z)        lor all s E [tI, eJ, 
                          r. (J.(z) - /.(z»a  < ;,  X (J.{s) - /.(:.».  < ; . 
           Now /. - /. is a step function  on [tI, e] and the propoeition ie cl-.rly  true 
            for step functions, 10 that 
                  I.' (J.(z) - /.(z».  - /.' (J.(z) - /.(z»a  + t (J.(z) - /,(z» •. 
            Therefore  .               I.' (j.(z)  - /,(z».  < ;  + ;  - e, 
            This shows that /  is integrable  on [tI, eJ, Convenely, if /  it intepable  on 
            [a, e1 ~hen for any  e > 0 there are Rep functiOlll /1, /. OIl [s, eJ such that 
                                       /1(Z) S fez)  S /.(z)  for all s E  [fJ, e) 
            and                                I.' (j.(s)  - /.(s».  < eo 
            Since            I.' (j.(s)  - /.(z».  ~ 0,  X (J.{z) - /1(Z».  ~ 0 
            and I.' (J.(z) - /1(Z».  -            I.' (J.(z) - /I(Z».  + X (j.{z)  - /I(S». 
            we have 
         Thus,  &pin  by the pmpoeition of the Iut. eection, /  is intep'able  on both 
         (0, b)  and  lb, e).  To  complete  the proof,  auppoee /  intepable  on  IG, b), 
         'lb, e)  and  [G, e).  Given  e > 0 we can  find  • > 0 noh  that  any  Riemann 
         aum for /  corresponding to partitions  of [G, b), lb, c) and [a, cl of width 1_ 
         than  I  differ in  absolute  value  from  L' /(z)dz,  I." /(z)dz and  L" I(.)dz 
         respectively by leaa than  _/3. Take partitions  of IG, b) and of IlJ, cl of width 
                                               , 
         1_ than • and Riemann aurna 81 8, for / COJTelPOndini to theBe pariltioDL 
         Then 81 + 8, ia a Riemann  sum for /  correspondinc  to & partition  oIIG, el 
         of width leaa than  I, and  we have 
                   81                           8
                  1 - f /(z)dzl < ;, 1• - J."/(z)dzl < ; , 
                                                        IS. + & - L"/(z)dz\ < : . 
         Therefore 
          I L'/(z)dz  + J."/(z)dz - L"/(z)dz I 
                          s I /.t!(z)dz - 8.1 + I J."/(z)dz - &1 
                                          +18.+8.- J:/(z)dz\  <t+ ; +t -.; 
          Since e wu any poeitive number, we have 
                                 Lt !(z)dz + I." I(z)dz - L" /(z)dz. 
          "...'don.       If! is an integrable  real-valued  function  on the internl 
          (G, b),  we set 
                                       r.!(z)dz  .. - J.'/(z)dz 
          and,  for any c E [CI, bJ,         1" /(z)dz  - O. 
          Corollary.     111 .. G ~l_~ fm ... """" ita R.teA ...... , 
          1M poinU CI, b, c ad if two of 1M ~ /.' /(s)dz, J: /Cs)dz, /.·/(e)ds 
          aNt, cNm 1M tAw __ anti 
                                  f.'/(z)dz  + J." I(z)dz  -   L"/(s)dz. 
               The epeoial cuea  G - b, b - c, and G - e are all trivial to mr"  10 
          we may uaume the thne numbeftl G, b, e diatinct. The pointe a, lJ, e deter-
          mine & certain  cbed interval  in R that •  ...-eel  .. the union 01 _ 
          eloaed subintervala,  namely  the  interval  (min Ia, b, cl, max (0, b, ell &ncI 
          the  two aubintervala determined by  that. point amonc G, Ii, c which ia 
          between  the  other  two.  The  existence  of  any  of  L' I(%)dz,  I." I(s)dz, 
            "/(%)dz is equivalent  to  the  existence  of  the  corresponding  I." I(%)dz, 
          L
           "                                                                            ,          . 
          f I(s)dz,  f I(%)dz, 80  the  proposition  tells  us  immediately  that  the 
          exiateDce of two of the integrals  in question  implies that  of the third.  Thus 
          we may uaume  that all the integrala  in question  exist  and  it remains  to 
          prove  the equality,  which we may  take  to be in  the  equivalent  but  more 
          qnunetric  fonn 
                               L'/(%)dz + /.·/(~dz + f I(z)dz  ... O. 
          To prove  this 1ut equality,  we note that  it does not atter  its sense wlder 
          the cyclic permutatiooa  of 0, 6, c which send 0, 6, c into b, c, 0  reepectively, 
          or into c, 0, 6 reepectively.  Hence we may .. ume without  1088 of leDeranty 
          that  6 is between 0  and  c. Thus  we are reduced  to the  two special  cues 
          • < " < cando>  6 > Co The truth  of the equality  in the firat cue follows 
          directly  from the proposition,  while the second case is the 88me as the til'St, 
          but witb a change of sips.                                             . 
                A further  coDleQuence of the proposition is that if a real-valued function 
          I  ia intepable  on a cloHd interval  in R then  1'/(%)dz  exists for all 0,6 
          in tbia e10eed interval.  We remark that if  1/(%) 1 S M for all % in tbe closed 
          interval  then for any 0, "  in the interval 
          This ia trivial  if 0  -   6, a CODI8Quence of the fact  that  -M S 1(%) S M 
          for all % in the interval  and the last  corollary  of ,2 if 0  < b, and  a conse-
           quence 01 the last cue and eymmetry of sign if 0  > b. 
           7'INorem  (Fanda .... "t.I theoNm  of cab"").                    IMI be CJ ccmtinuoua 
           ,...,...,ueclfvnt:4iqr& Oft 8ft opm inIenIGl U in R and let 0  E U. Let the/UfldiOft 
           F Oft U be ".. by F(%) - L·/(t)dt lor aU % E U. Then F if differentiable 
           _'-I· 
                Since 1 is continuous,  F(s)  -       L"/(t)dt is defined  for  all  % E  U.  We 
           have to ahow that for any fixed Z'1I E  U 
                                         •    F(%) - F(:eo).      I() 
                                        1
                                         1m                    -    %0. 
                                        -..       s  - Z'1I 
           For any z E U, z .. :ee, we bave 
             '(:c) - '(z.)                I I L·/(t)tlC - L" 1(l)dt                     I 
           I :c -:ee            -/(z.)  -                 :c -:ee             -/(z~ 
                                        _I J; 1(')tlC _  J~ 1(z.)tlC I_I J~ (J(t)  ~ I(z.»dt I. 
                                              :c-1Ce           :c-1Ce                     :c-zo 
          &iDee I II conuuoue  at ICe, liven any  I  > 0 we can find a a > 0 IUcb that 
           1/(:c) -/(z.) 1< • if :c E U and  l:c -1Ce1 < f. Thue ih E U, 1% - 2:01 < a 
           and z"lCe then for &oy e in tbe cloeed interval  of extremities:lt  and  z we 
           bave  I/(e)  -/(z.) I < ., 10 that 
                                      I L: (J(t)  -/(z.»tlCIS  .1. -1Ce1· 
           (We bave  UI8Cl the remark immediately  preceding  the ltatement  of the 
           t.beorem.)  Therefore  if :c E U,  l:c -1Ce1 <, and % "ICe we bave 
                                   ,(:e)  - I'(z.)  -/(z.) I S  ·t~ -jl - •. 
                                 I z-a:.                               z-_. 
           TbiI pIOV. the d_red limit ltatement. 
           CoreUary J.  111 if Q conti,.,"*, reakalued fu'Mlitm  OR CIf'& open ifttBrtHJl 
           ita ft,  lAM tItere aiD ca retJl..tHJlued /tIftclitm I' Oft  1M ICImB  i1&ter1l41 whou 
           tIeriNIiN it I. 
                 For if. II any fixed point in the interval,  1'(%) -                L·/(OtlC will do. 
                 We recall that if F' -I then I' II called an tJJ&titltriIGtille or primitive 
           of I. Corollary  1 1&11 that any continuoue real·valued  function  on an open 
           interval  baa an  antiderivative.  H I' ia an antiderivative  of I on an open 
           interval,  10 II I' + 0 for any ccmatant 0 E R. Furthermore,  any antideriva-
           tive of I muet bave the fonn  I' + 0 : for if 0 is another  antiderivative  of I, 
           then (0 -1')'  - G' - F' - 0, 10 0 - I' mUBt be coDltant,  by Corollary  1 
           of the m-.n value theorem. 
            CoroIIar7 J.  111M ....... ,., ~ I' OR CIf'& open iftttlnHll U ita R IaCII 
           lIN ccmCiftUOUl tIeriIHJIWe I GfItl 0, b E U, """ 
                                              Lt/(t)de - '(b)  - '(0). 
                  Since  ! (J: I(e)de - F(:c») -/(z)  -/(%)  - 0,  J: I(t)dt - 1'(%) is 
            CODBtant.  Tbue  L· l(t)tlC - F(z) + 0,  lor  lOme  c E R.  In  particular 
           0- J: I{OtlC - F(ca) + 0,  10  that  0 -                 -F(ca).     Therefore  f I(t)dt-
            I'(z)  -  I'(ca). Hence  L' l(I)tlC - '(b)  - 1'(0). 
           Il11    VI.  mBIlANN  INTIIO .... TlON 
                 Thi8 coro1Iary i8 a powerful tool for ttie computation  of integral8. For 
           example, if n i8 a  positive integer  then  the  function  :c"+I/(n + 1) has the 
           continuous derivative  :c", 80 that 
                                       L' ~"th - (b,,+1 - a,,+I)/(n + t). 
           Corollary  3 (Change  oJ tmriab'e  theorem).                       Let l.T, V be open ifI.tmHJU 
           in  R,  IP:  U -     V  a  differentiable Junction with  continuoua deriooliN, and 
           J:  V -   R a rofttinuous Junction. Then Jor any a, b E  U 
                                        J.tI(M J(v)dv = L·/(IP(u»IP'(u)du . 
                                         .<.,                • 
                 Let  F:  V -      R  be  the  fu!,!ction defined  by  F(y)  =- /;., I(v).  for  all 
           1/ E  V.  Then  F  i8  differentiable  and  F' =-I.  The  function  G: U -                          R 
           defined by G(~) .. 1"(·) I(v).  is the composite G == F 0  IP of two differen-
                                       toI., 
           tiable  function8, hence i8 itself differentiable.  By  the  chain  rule  we have 
           G'(~) - F'{IP(~»IP'(~) -/(IP(~»IP'(~)  for  all  s E  U.  Hence  G(s)-
            /.- 1(IP(u) )1P'(u)du + c,  for  80me constant  c E R .. Setting  s  - CI  we  get 
           c -= 0,80  that  G(~) = I.·/(IP(u»IP'(u)du.  This  last  equation  holds for all 
           ~ E U. Setting ~ = b gives U8 Corollary 3. 
                           I S.  THE WGARITHMIC  AND EXPONENTIAL FUNcrIONS. 
                  In thi8 8ection we develop in a rigorous fashion the familiar properties 
            of 80me of the functions which are dealt  with in elementary  calculus. 
            Definition.        If % E R,  % > 0, then  log % = le ~ . 
            Proposition.          The lunction  log:  1% E  R  : ~ > 01 - R  ia  differentiable 
            with  dlog~/th .. 1/~, it is striclly incrMBing, flBBUme3  all valuu  in R,  and 
            8€ltisjie. the rule. 
                                  log X1/ ... log % + log 1/      if~, 11 > 0 
                                       ~ 
                                  log, - log % - log II  if~, II > 0 
                                  log~" - n log s                  V s > 0, n an integer. 
                   The differentiability  of log, together  with  the  equation  dlogs/th  -
             I/~, comes from  the  fundamental  theorem  of calculus.  Since  I/~ > 0  if 
            Ie > 0, the derivative  of log is alway8 positive, 80 log is a .trictly  increasing 
            function. If a i8 80me fixed positive number and 1/ = fIX,  the chain rule gives 
                                         d               Idy           t            I 
                                        -Iog,,=--=-.a--
                                        th               yth          ~             s' 
                                                  15.  LOOAJtI'I'IIJIIO AND IIXJOIf8II'I'I4L  ..,.,enONa     119 
           so  that  dloga/d:r  ... dlogs/d:r  and  hence  loga -lOIs + e,  for  IIOme 
           e E  R. Setting  s  - 1 giVell e - log a, 110 that  101 CUI - 101 G + 101 s.  After 
           changing notation  we have 
                                       logSIl -logs + 10111  ih, II> O. 
            In the special case s  - 1/11 this yields 1011/1/ -                -101 II, 110 thM 
                                   s                      1 
                             log, -logs t log, -logs  -10111  if s," > O. 
            Clearly if z > 0 then 
                                  log s' - log 1 == 0 ... 0 • log z 
                                  logs'  == logs  .. 1 • logs 
                                  logs'  -logs + logs  - 2 logs 
                                  logZ&-log  (s'. s)  -logs'  + logs  - 310gs 
                                  etc. 
            80 that 
                                   logs" - nlogs  if .. - 0, 1,2.3,  .... 
            If n - 0, 1,2, 3, ... , then  log r" - log l/s"  -                  -101 S" - (-.. ) lOIS, 10 
            that 
                                   log ... -   n log z  if z > 0, n any integer. 
            Since 2 > 1 we have 1012 > log 1 - O.  Since 1012" - .. 1012, given any 
            .., E R we can find integera nt. tat  such that 
                                                 log 2"t < .., < 1012"1 
            (simply by taking"l  < ..,/1012 < nt).  By the intermediate  value theorem 
            there is some e between 2"1 and 2" such that loge - ..,. That  is, ~ loc 
            function takes on all values. Everything  desired has been proved. 
            Definition.         exp is the inverae function of log, that is 
                                          exp (s)  - II     means  s - 101". 
                   This  makes aen8e  since  the  101 function  is  one-one  (heiDI I&rictly 
            increuing).  We avoid the notation  If'  for the moment to avoid eonfull_ 
            with our exi8tinl notation  for powera. 
             Propoeldon.          TIN /uftdiqn  up: R -Is E R : s > 01  .. cICt ..... ,. .... , 
            VIiIA clap (a)/.  - eX)) (s).  l' .. eCricIlrI ~, .........  ." "... 
             NlUf8, ncI ~"..""" 
                             up (a) • up (w) - up (s + 1/)  iI s, 1/ E R 
                                         exp~a~ _  exp(a  -,)  q s"ER 
                                         exp  II 
                                        exp (ns) - (exp (a»·              iI a E R, n GR ..,.. 
           ISO      VI.  IIIIU1ANN INTllOL\TlON 
                  To  prove  this,  forget  about  differentiability  for  a  moment.  Then 
            everything  elae follows immediately  from the  corresponding  properties  of 
            the log function.  (The easiest way to prove the equations  is to check each 
            to see if it gives a correct statement  when log is applied to both sides. Every-
            thing works out, using the identity  log (exp (z»  .. z and the corresponding 
            formulas for log.) A. for differentiability,  we fil'8t prove  that  exp is con-
            tinuous.  We must show that  for any Zo E R and any  t  > 0 there  exists a 
            I> 0 such that  lexp (z) - exp (Zo) 1 < • if  Iz - Zol < I. We may aaaume 
            that  e < exp (Zo).  Since  exp  is  strictly  increasing,  if  z  is  between 
            log (exp (zo) - e)  and  log (exp (z.)  + e)  then  exp (z)  will  be  between 
            exp (Zo) - e and exp (Zo) + e. Hence we insure that  I exp (z)  - exp (z.) I < • 
            whenever  Iz - Zol < I by choosing 
                        ,  -  min Is. -log (exp (Zo) - .),Iog  (exp (Zo) +.) - z.1. 
            Thus exp is continuous. To prove exp differentiable and find its derivative, 
            let  Zo E R be fixed and  write  exp (Zo) - I/o, exp (z) ... 1/. Then  lim 1/ -                             II. 
            and                                                                                            - ... 
                 •    up (z) - exp (Zo)              I·    ______ 11<----".11.:...°_                 1 
                I
                1m       -                        ...  1m 
               _..            z - s.                 ..... log 1/ -     log 1/.         lim  log 1/ - log I/o 
                                                                                        "'W.         Y -I/o 
                                                              1                 1 
                                                  -     til               - -1- - y." up (Zo). 
                                                           ogl/(  ) 
                                                       ~ 1/.                   1/. 
             This ends the proof. 
                   The symbol Z" has 80 far been defined only for integral values of n. In 
             this  case,  if  z > 0,  we  have  logz"  =  nlogz,  80  that  z" = exp(nlogz). 
             Hence the following definition is consistent  with our existing notation. 
             ~nition.  If z, n E R, z > 0, then z" ... exp (nlogz). 
             Propoaition.            For z, 1/, n, mER, z, 1/ > 0, IN luwB 
                                                          Z'"    Z- -= z"'" 
                                                               -:1:"  -  Z"--
                                                                z· 
                                                             (z") .....  z"" 
                                                             (ZI/)" .. z"l/" 
                                                            Loa  __ -I 
                                                            ~ ....  =, ...... 
                    The four algebraic  identities  follow immediately  from  the  definition 
             and previous results of this section.  For example, 
                                             Iii.  LOCWIlTIUIlC  AJlD UION&N'IUL  rvNCl'I'IONB     lSI 
                 Z"' • S- ...  exp (n log~) • exp (m log~) =- eXp (n log ~ + m log:.:) 
                                                                =  exp «n + m) log~) =  ~.+-. 
          The proof of the last  fonnula  is an exercise in the chain rule: 
             d          d                                       d                       n 
            dzZ"' '"" di" up (n log:.:) =  exp (n log z)di"(n  log~) ... z· • z = nJ:,,-1. 
                The rules for fractional  exponents  are of course contained  ill the last 
          proposition.  For example Zlll  -        ~,since (ZIIl)1  .. Zl ...  Z. 
                It is  convenient  to  extend  the  definition  of  x"  slightly  by  setting 
          0- - 0 if n > 0, so that  for any  fixed positive  n the  fUllction x·  is con-
          tinuous  for ~ ~ O. 
          Dlffinltlon.      •  ... exp  (1). 
                We immediately  recover  the  atandard  notation  for  the  exponential 
          function:  if z E  R  then  If'  -   exp (s log.)  - exp (~), since  log.  - 1. Thus 
          we may write  the  formulas  of  the  proposition  before  last  in  their  more 
          convenient  forma 
                                                         d 
                                      ... tJI =~, d.i"1f'''' .. , etc. 
                A  rough  approximation  of  e  may  be obtained  by  noting  that  for 
           1 S s S 2 we have  1/2 S  lIz S  I, so that  1/2 S  hi dz/s  - 1012 S  1. As 
          a matter  of fact,  we can get the slightly  stronger  relation 
                                                1 
                                                "2<log2<1 
           by remarking  that it is easy to find a larger step function  than the constant 
           1/2 that is leas than or equal  to l/~ for 1 S  z S  2, and a smaller  one than 
           the  constant  1 that  is greater  than  or equal  to  1/~ for  1 S  z S 2.  From 
           1/2  < log 2 <  1 follows 1 < 10121 < 2. Hence log 2 <  1 < log 4, 80 
                                                   2 <. < 4. 
                 It should  be remarked  that  of course we could  have  obtained  all the 
           ...wts  of  this  section  differently,  Bf4rting  with  the  exponential  function. 
           The argument  (in outline)  is as follows:  For  any  fixed positive  integer  n 
           the  function  z· is continuous  and  strictly  increasing  for z ~ 0,  assuming 
           arbitrarily  large values.  Therefore  by the intermediate  value  theorem  I.\OY 
           poaitive  number  has a  unique  positive n'A root.  We define rational  powel'B 
           of a number  z > 0 by setting 
                                      z""" ... (positive  na root  of z)· 
           if m and n are integers  with  no common factor  other  than  ::c 1 and  n > O. 
           We then  prove  the  various  rulea of exponents,  for rational  exponents.  If 
          lSI    VI.  RlIlIlANN  lNT11ORATION 
          ,1:  > 0  and  n E  R  is not  rational,  we can find a sequence nlo fit,"', ...  of 
          rational  Ilumbel'll that  converges to ni we then  define.1:" to be the limit of 
          the  sequence  .1:"1,.1:"1, ,1:"',  ••• ,  fi1'8t 8howing that  thi8  limit  exiata and  is 
          independent  of the  choice of the sequence n" fit, fit, .. .. We then  verify 
          all the rules of exponents for arbitrary  real exponents. Next we look at the 
          function u.", for 80me fixed 4  > 0, 8how by a suitable trick that it i. differen-
          tiable,  and  8how al80 that  for  a  very  8pecial choice of base  4,  a  choice 
          denoted  8,  we get  the  magic formula  tbI'/d.z =~. Finally  we do  the  log 
          function, which at thi8 point is easy. Thus we end up with a more natural, 
          but  conaiderably longer, derivation  of exactly  the Bante results  as before. 
          PROBLEMS 
            1.  Compute  /.1 = directly  from  the  definition of the  intearal,  UlllUmilll only 
                that this Intewal exists. 
            2.  Prove that  C,(s)a - 0 if 1(I/n)  - 1 for n - 1,2,3,  ...  and I(z)  - 0 for 
                all other z. 
            3.  Does C/(%)dz  exist if I is tlte function of Problem l(d),  Chap. IV? 
            4.  Let I: [a, h) .... R  and  let  c E  R.  Prove  that  if  Lt I (%)dz exists then  10  does 
                J:: ,(z - c)dz and these two integrals are equal. 
            Ii.  Prove  that  a  continuous  real-valued  funotion  on  a  cloeed interval  in  R  il 
                integrable, using only Lemma 1 of 13 and uniform coJltinuity. 
            6.  Let  (a, h)  be a  clOIII!d interval  in  R  and  let  V  be a  complete Jlormed vector 
                apace (of. Prob. 22, Chap. III). 
                (a)  Show that  the definition of L' I (s)a for real-valued functiollll  on [a, h) 
                     pneralilC8 to functions I:  (a, b) ..... V. 
                (b)  Prove the analog of  the  criterion  for  integrability  of  Lemma  1  of  13 
                     for V -valued functions on (a, b). 
                (c)  Using (b), prove that if I:  (a, b] ..... V il continuous then  J.' I(z)ds  exiat.L 
                (d)  Prove that  if I:  (a, b] ..... V is continuoul  then 
                                         II  /.'/(s)a\\ S  /.'II/(S) II a. 
                (e)  Prove that if V is finite-dimeneional with basis PI, .•• , II", and if II, •• • ,1" 
                     are  real-valued  functlonl  aD  (a, b],  tlten  J: (/I(S).,. + ... + I,,(z) ... )dz 
                     exIate if and only if r. I.(%)dz, •.. , /.' I.(s)a exist, in which cue 
                     r. (f.(s).,. + ... + I.(%)v,,)dz - (/.'Ia(z)a )11. + ... + (r. I.(z)a ) .... 
                      (For part  (e) you will need the result of Prob. 23, Chap. IV.) 
                                                                                      ,.,.....        us 
           Prove  that  if the  real-valued  function 1 on the  interval  Ie, 6) ie bounded  and 
           il continuou8 except at a finite number of points, then  r. I(~)dz ~ 
           Prove that if I:  lei, h) -   R is increuina  (or decreasing) thfJD r. I(z)a exietL 
           Prove  that  if the  real-valued  function I on the interval  (fI, 6) ie iatepable  on 
           (eI, hI then  80 is III, and I Lt'(Z)a I s r. II(~) I •. 
           Prove  that  if the real-valued  function I on the interval  (a, 6) ie iatepable  OIl 
           lei, h)  then  80 is 1'. Using the identity  (J + ,)1 -I' + ~, + t, prove that the 
           product  of ~wo integrable  functionl  il integrable. 
           Prove that  if I is .. continuou8 real-valued  function  on the interval  (a, b) IUeh 
           that  I(z) ~ 0  for  all  z E (eI, hI  and  I(z) > 0  for  iome  II E la, bl.  then 
           J: ,(z). > o. 
           Show that  if 1 il .. continuoul  real-valued  function  on the Interval Ie, b] then 
           J: I (z)a  -/(E)(h - a)  for  lOme E E [G, hI  (mean  value  theorem for  inte-
           grals). 
           Show that  if 1 il a continuous  real-valuedfuncUon  OIl  the iDtervaI la, bl and 
           I(z) ~ 0 for all z E  [a,6), then 
                           ~i.!! (r. (j(z».d.1:)a'" - max I/(z)  : z E (G, bU. 
           Show that  if 1 ie a continuous  real-valued  function  OIl  ,. E R : II ~ 01  ADd 
           lim/(z)  - c (el. Prob. 8, Chap.  IV),  then 
           ... -                            lim!  fa I(Qdt _ c . 
                                           ... _zJ. 
            Let (eI, b)  and  (e, dJ  be closed intervals  in  R  and  let I be .. continuous  real-
            valued  function  on  I (z, r) E gt : z E (a, b), r E (C, dJl. Show that the  func-
            tion,:  Ie, dJ -  R defined by,(y)  - r. I(z, r)a for all r E (c,1II II continuous. 
            Prove  that  the  real-valued  function  on  caa, hD  which .ada  aD)'  I  iato 
            J: I (z). ie uniformly continuous. 
            Prove  that  if  l' and "  are  real-valued  functioaa  OIl  an  open  .w.n of  R 
            containi .. the  interval  la, h) and if l' and ,  have continuous  derlvatl .... &hell 
            (intearation  by parts) 
                    L' 1'(Z)II'(II).  - 1'(6)11(.) - l&(a)lI(o)  -       L'II(.>U·(."" 
            Provetbat          f· ,.m:;a     tit       J:  flu 
                              J.         v'1 _ p.  ,I +...  for aU z E •. 
             19.  8hcnr that if U is aD open interval  in R and the function /: U ...... R baa a COD-
                   tIauoua (a + 1)" derivative  on U, then for any a. II E  U we bave 
                       1(6) _ J(a) +1'(a)~I- a) +1"(a)~I- a)' + ... + .r"'(a)~I- a)· 
                                                                 E (6 - %). /,,*II(s)a 
                                                             +                 "I               . 
             •    . A CW'IJ8 '" •  tneri: IJHIC8 B iI a OODtiDlIOWI fUDCtion I froID an iDtervaI la. 61 
                   iD •  iDto B; ita lattA iI 
                       Lu.b. {tcl(J~I)./(~) : ~ Sl, .. 0' s. iI a partition of la, b}. 
                                                                                                                J
                   if tbia Lu.b .... Prove that if B - .. aDd 1(%) - (J.(%). 000 ,J .. (%», where 
                   la, ••• ,1.: (., 6J ...... R are  00Dtin1lOWl functiOhl which bave  6oDtiououa daiva-
                   tine on (a, 6) that exteDd to OODtioUOua functioaa on la, 61. then the curve baa 
                   lqtb and tltillenith II 
                                              r. " C/a'(s»' + ... + (J.'(%»' a. 
             II.  Compute 
                   <a)  ~I.+.~;" +",whereA:eR,II>O 
                               (    I        .   1                  l\ 
                   (b)  !!: _+1 +_+1 + ... + W· 
             Do  Show thM for _ - 1, 2, a, 0  ••• tile IlWDber 
                                                         I     I              1 
                                                  1+I+i+'"  +;-IDI. 
                    II pGIltive, .... it _n .. _ iNn .... MIl __ that the .......  of 
                   ..........  OOD"- to a Iimlt ..".. 0 aDd 1 (Euler's eoaataDt). 
             28.  Prove that the only fuDction I: R -                  R aaeh that I' - I uad 1(0) - 1 is liVeD 
                    br 1(S)  -,. 
             II.  ProvethM 
                    (a)  .. (1 +.) S s for all s > -1, with equality if and only if s - 0 
                    (b)  tI" ~ 1 +. for all s, with equality  if and only if % - 0 
                    (c)  lim toe (l + .) _ 1 
                          -           % 
                           _                       _., 
                    (d)  lim (1 + _)"a  -lim  (1 +!\. - tI" 
                    <e>  lim .( .... -      1) - 10K %  if. > O. 
                          -
              II.  Show that lor •  > • the functioll ~ i. Itrictly  deoreuinl  and  that it pta 
                    arbIlrarIlJ .... to aero, heDoe that 
                          _ .. 
                    (a)'"  S!_O                      11_>0 
                    (b)  lim  .. toe s - 0  if _ > 0 
                          -
                    (e)  lim  .!: - 0                for aD)' •  E  R. 
                          _tI" 
                                                                                                                        .........           us 
             .. DefiDe I: R -               R by                             .... ,..   ifz>O 
                                                             I(z)  -     {  o           ifs:S;O. 
                     Prove that I baa derivatiVt!l of all orden, with I""  (0) - 0 for all ft. 
              Z1.  If at. E R, 0<., and I: Iz E R : a < z S .,- Ria a OOIltiououa fUDCtiou., 
                     de&ae the .. ,...,.,.....,                    ,. I(z). to be 8m J:/(z)tJz, if this limit uiIt&. 
                                                                  J...                       _  II 
                     Show  that  if  ,  II  &DOther  eontiououa  real-valued IUDCtion  OIl  the  .. 
                     Is E R : 8 < z S 6111lCh that 1/(21) I :s; ,(z) for all 21 ill this eat and ! ,(21). 
                     aiata, then  f..,/(Z)tlz                exiate. Hence IIhow that  !  1(21).  uiate  if  there 
                     aiata aD CI < I  8Ilch  that  (z - .).,  is bouDded on (a, 6). 
              28.  II  a E R  and I: Iz E R : II: ~ .1- R  is a contiououa fUJICtion, define the 
                     _,...,.,......,              /.-/(21).  to be lim t/(z).,  if this limit exist. (el. Prob. 
                                                   .                         ......                                                   . 
                     8, Chap. IV). Show that  if ,  is another CIODtioUOua real-valued function  OIl 
                      Is E R : 21 ~ _I, if 1/(21) I :s; ,(21) for all 21 ~ ., and if  L .... ,(z)a  exiata, then 
                     f .... 1(21)= uiIt&. Heace Ibow that  L'" 1(21).  exiata if there exiata aD CI > 1 
                     IIlCh that z-f (21) ia bounded. 
         CHAPTER  VII 
         Interchange  of Limit Operations 
                                    The  various  kinds  of limiting  proeellllel we  have 
                              . Btudied (limit of a eequence of pointe in a metric ..... 
                               limit  of a function,  differentiation,  integration)  do not. 
                               always  ocour  aingly.  In  a  given  problem  we may  be 
                               ealled upon to take one kind of limit, then ano~ kind. 
                               In auch problema the order in whioh the operations  are 
                             . performed  ia naturally  of importance.  We have already 
                               treated  such a problem  in applyins  the two operat.iona 
                               lim  and  lim  to  a  sequence  of  lunetioDl  lit 1.,/., ... 
                               "...      "...~ 
                               from  one  metric  apace  into  another,  ,. heiDI a  point 
                               of the  first  metrio  apace.  II lim I.(P)  exiat.a for  each 
                                                                ...... 
                               n - 1,2,3,  ...  we get  a sequence 01 pointe  Um/.(p), 
                                                                                 ...... 
                               lim /,(P), lim /.(P),  • .•  in the eecond metrio apace, and 
                               .. PI     .. PI 
                               we may be able to take Jim 01 this sequence of pointe. 
                                                          -
                               On the other  hand  the limit  lunction  lim/.  may exiIt-
                                                                          -
                               and if it does we may be able to apply lim to the limit 
                                                                           -
                               function,  again  getting  a  point  in  the  I8COIld mekie 
                               space. However it may happen that aU 01 ~ open.. 
                               tiona  can  be  performed  and  we  arrive'  M  dilerent 
                               &DIWel'I  in the two CMeI.  In OIle  edNmely  import;ut 
                               caae  this  cannot  happen,  lor  we have  pIOved thM if 
                               /1,/,,/.,  ...  is a uniformly  COIlV8J'l8llt eequence of-~ 
                               tinuoua functiona,then  Um I. is aIIo COIltiDUOUl, 10 that 
                                                  ,      -
                               lim «(lim/.}(p»     -   (lim/.){JIt) 
                               "PI    -                -
                                                   -1im/.{JIt)  -lim (Jim/.(p». 
                                                      -             --
                                          In this chapter  we prove a number of similar results for 
                                          other  pail'S of limiting  processes.  No  attempt  will be 
                                          made to be systematic;  we only intend to provide BOrne 
                                          especially useful results. At the same time we take  the 
                                          opportunity  to discU88 the meanings of these results for 
                                          infinite  series, which ill how infinite sequences usually 
                                          ariae in practice, developing the theory of infinite series 
                                          sufficiently for the  purposes of calculus. An exposition 
                                          of  the  trilOnometric  functions  is  given  ..  an  eaay 
                                           application. 
                                                11.  INTEGRATION AND DIFFERENTIATION OF 
                                                                                SEQUENCES OF FUNCfIONS. 
                    u 1.,/" I., . .. it a aequence of Wemann  integrable  real-valued  func-
            ticma on ..  cIoeed interval  [ca, b)  in  R  and  'I, ,., ,., . .. converges  to  the 
             function I on [ca, b), can we assert that 
                                                  f./(z)th  - ~ f.,.(z)th? 
             The followilll  example  shows  that  in  general  we  cannot,  not  even  if 
            II, I., I., •..  are  all  continuous. 
                    ~ For" - 1, 2, 3, . .. let ,.: (0, 1] - R  be defined by Fig-
             ure ao (f. can be defined analytically  by setting/ .. (z) - 4nlz for 0 S  z s 
             1/2n,  I.(s)  - 4ft - 4ft's  for  1/2n  < z S  l/n,  , .. (%) - 0  for  l/n < % S  1). 
             For euh ",I. it continuous and  /.' I.(z)dz - 1, BO that lim  /.1 I.(z)dz  - 1. 
                                                                 •                                 .-.co  • 
             On the other  band,l-lim/.  - O. (For clearly 1(0) -= 0 and if % J4 0 then 
                                                   -
             I.(z)  - 0 if" > l/z.)  Hence  f./(z)dz  - 0 '" lim/"/ .. (z)dz. 
                                                             •                       .-.cD  0 
                    If,  however, 11,/.,/1, ...  converg_  uniformly,  there  is no trouble: 
             r,.....m.  I..c 0, b E R,  Q  < b,  and  1st  II, I., ,., ...  be  Q  uniformly 
             ....,.,.,.,.,    teqUmce  01 continuoua rtGl-ualued lunctiona on (a, hI. Then 
                                              f. (~'.(z»th - ~~ L·,·(z)th. 
                                                              11.  O .... UOII.OII  UQIWICIIII     119 
                                                   111 
                                                   s. 
                      l'Iov .. 30. Graph of the fllDCt.i.on I. of the example on p. 138. 
                Let I - lim I •. Bince each I. is oontinuoWl and the OODV81'pDG8  it 
                           -
          uniform, I is oontinuoWl. In particular I is inte&rable on (G, b). By tbede8Q1 .. 
          tion of uniform convergence, for any e > 0 there exists a poeitive in ... N 
          auch that if " > N  then  I/(z) -I.(z) I < e/(b - G)  for aD ~. e (4, b]. We 
          then  have the inequalitl81 
                                          •                               e 
                                    --,,-S/(~) -I.(~) S-,,-
                                         -a                              -G 
          for aD ~ E (4, b), which imply 
                                      -e S f: (J(~) -I.(~)}ds S e 
          or 
          This laat inequality  holds for all"  > N, and therefore 
                                        lim L·I.(~)ds - L·/(~)ds. 
                                        .... .                 . 
                RIIMAax.  The earne theorem  holds if we do not ... ume that each I. 
          is oontinuoWl, but  merely  Riemann  integrable  on (a, b). Indeed  the .. me 
          proof will hold once it is shown that I - lim I. is integrable.  Tbis  call  be 
                                                               .-
          done easily uailll  the criterion  of the proposition of 13 of the last chapter, 
             140       m. INTIIRCRANOB  OP LIMIT OnBATIONS 
             as follows. Given any e > 0, by uniform convergence we can find an integer 
             n such that  I/(x)  - I.(x) I < e/3(b  - a) for all x E [a, b), 80 that 
                                       I .. (x)  -   3(b ~ a)  S I(x)  S I .. (x) + 3(b ~ a) 
             for all x E (a, b). Since I. is integrable  on (a, b) there  exist step  functions 
             '1,,, on  (a, b)  luch  that  (/l(X) S I .. (x) S ,,(x)  for  all  z E [a,")  and 
              f (,.(z)  - 'I(X»d:e < ./3. Then '1 - ./3("  - a)  and  ,,+ ./3("  - a)  are 
             ltep functions on [a, "1 IUch that 
                                       'I(X)  -      3(b ~ a)  S I(z)  S ,.(x)  + 3(& ~ a) 
              for all x E (a, h) and 
                              r. «,.(x) + 3(h ~ a»                      - ('I(Z)  -          3(& ~ a»)d:e < •. 
              By the proposition quoted, /  il integrable  on (a, "). 
                      To prove an analogous result  for the differentiation  of the limit  of a 
              eequence  of  differentiable  functions  ODe  has  to  make  slightly  stronger 
              &88umptions. 
              Theorem.              Let Jr, It, la, ... be a sequence 01 real-valtwl lu'ftdioM on an open 
              interval U in R, each 1uwing a continuous derivative. Suppose tMt 1M aequence 
              N, It', fa', . . . conver,es uniformly on U and thllt lor 801M a E U 1M aequence 
              11(a),I.(a), '.(a),  ...  converges. Then lim/ .. existB, iI diJferentiabk, and 
                                                                             .. -
                                                              (lim/ .. )'  -     lim/.'. 
                                                               ---               .-. 
                      By the fundamental  theorem of calculus we have 
                                                        I." 1 .. '(t)tIt  .. , .. (x)  -   I .. (a) 
               for  any  x E  U and  any  n'" 1,2,3,  ....  Let  lim!.'  - (I. By the  previous 
                                                                                             .. -
               theorem  lim (f.(z)  - /.(a»· exists  for  any  z E  U and  equala  r. (I(OtU • 
                               .. -                                                                                            . 
               Since lim/ .. (a)  exists,  80  doee lim/.(x).  Setting  lim/ .. (x) - fez) we have 
                         ....                                       It....                        . ... 
                                                          I(x)  - I(a)  ..  f ,(t)tIt 
               for each x E  U. A BeCOnd use of the fundamental  theorem of calculus giVeR 
               I' - I, which is what. was to be proved. 
                                                                                 12. III ......  _           1ft 
                                                                                 I J.  INFINITE sa ... 
                 If ai, lit, lit,  • ••  i8 a  sequence  of  real  numben,  by the  ~iIe ..... 
                                                 al+IIt+Ge+  "', 
           also denoted 
           we mean the sequence Os, Cli +  CIt, Cli +  CIt + Ge, •••• The tenna 01 the latter 
           sequence are called the pcartiGl "'tria  01 the eeri •. If A E R, we lAY that the 
           infinite eeri.  c:onvcrgu to A if the sequence 01 partialBUme conVe1J81 to A, 
           that  il if                     lim (CII + CIt + ... + ca.) - A. 
                                           --
           If the leri.  converges to A it iB CUltomary to call A the ... '" oJ 1M .... 
           (although  thil iB not a lum at all, but a limit of BUmB) and it iI CUItoInary 
           to write 
           or 
            (Thie  somewhat  awkward  convention,  whereby  we \lie  the aymbol  Os + 
           CIt + CIt + ... to  denote  both  the  eeri.  and  ita BUm, if the latter  exilte, 
            rarely  cauaee confueion, lince  it i8 ueually  clear  from the context  whether 
            the aeries or ita lum i. meant.)  If a leri.  converpll  to some _                         number, 
            the aeries iB uid  to converge, or to be ~i in the contnry  ... the 
            aeries diHrgu,  or i. diver,ent. 
                  Similarly,  if 11,1.,1., ...  il  a  sequence  of  real-valued  functiona  on a 
            metric  lpace  E, by the infinite leri. 
                                                   11+1.+1.+ ... 
            we  mean  the  sequence  01  functioDl  11,/1 + lit II + I, + I., . . .. We .Y 
            that  the  eeri.  ~ cat 1', for  a  certain  ,  E  B, if  the __ /I~) + 
            Ih) + fa(p) + ... converpllj  otherwiBe  the  eeri.  II + I. + I. + ... iI 
            eaid  to diNT,.  cat p.  The aeri.  iB uid to "",..,."  Oft  B  (or,  more  limply, 
            to "",..,.,,)  if it conve ... at each point  01 Bj in thiB cue tbe1e iI •  _. 
            valued  function Ion B BUob that  1(P) iI  the awn of  the  -- 1,(:,) + 
            1.(1') + 1.(1') + ... for  each l' E  S,  and  we of COUl'IIe write 
                                                11+1.+1.+'"  -I. 
            Finally,  we  uy  that  II + I. + I. + . .. CIII&I1er,_ ~ OIl B if the 
            eequence  of  partial  lOmB 11,/1 + 1.,/1 + /. + I., . ..  converpe  uniformly 
            onE. 
         ExAMPLII.  If a E R, I al < 1, then  the  "geometric"  series  ~ G- -
      1 + G + G' + ... converges. In fact, since 
                               l 
                 (1 - G)(1 + G + a + ... + a-')  - 1 - a" 
      we have 
                            1            I-a" 
                     I +G+o + ... +a-· ---
                                         I-G 
      10 that. 
                       -        1-0-      1 
                      'r G- -lim --- - --. 
                      ~  -- I-a         I-G 
      (We have beN ued the fact  that  lim G- - 0 if lal < 1. Thia was proved 
                                -
      at t.he end of ,3 of Chapter III.  Another proof is obtained  by noting that. 
      1011 ai- - ft 101 I al is negative and  pta arbitrarily  large in abIOlute value 
      u  tI iDCl'elllll.) Lettilll  s  denote  the identity  function  on R, u  usual,  we 
      pt the analoaoue statement  for the aeries of functiolUl on the metric apace 
      (-1,1):                        . 
                                           I 
                      l+s+sI+sI+  .. · ---. 
                                         I-s 
          The elementary  facts about  infinite sequences of real numbers can be 
      tranalated immediately  into fac .... about  infinite .em. of real numbers.  For 
      example, lince an infinite sequence can have at IllOBt one limit,  an infinite 
      aeries can have at IllOBt one Bum. Aa another  example, &ince a sequence of 
      real numbers  converpa  if and only if it ia a Cauchy  sequence, a aeri.  of 
      real numbers converpa  if and only if i .... sequence of partialauma  ia a Cauchy 
      IIIqUence.  Since for ft > '" the difference between  the "," and  ft"  partial 
      aurna of the eerieI •• + CIa + lie + . .. ia ..... + ..... + ... + .. , we have 
       the followinl  ..... t. 
       Propoall.". TAe wiu 0/ real number.  a. + CIa + .. + ...  corwergu if 
      ,., Oftl, ii, pm -II • > 0, tMre it a poaitir1e integer N auch that if 71 > '" ~ 
       N  IAeft 
                       1 .....  + ..... + ... + .. 1 < eo 
          The followilll two corollari.  are immediate. 
       CaNIIary I.  1/ t.U wiu 0/ real number. G. + .. + .. + ... COftIIerge., 
       "Iim .. -O. 
          -
                                           ..                ..                             11. .... __  ItS 
             CoroIIory  J.  1/  ~ ca,.  ." ~ 6. .,.. ifllI:law atria  0/ ,., "umbtr. ,avd& 
             IIttIl ca,. -  6. vIaeraaw n U ~" lorge, lAm i/ mae atria etmII6f'fIU  10 
             dGatMotMr.                                                      .. 
                    EuIO'LJD 1.  The geometric eeriee ~ CI· does not converge if 1111 ~ 1 
             by the fim corollary. 
                    Ex.uIPLJII 2.  The  "harmonic"  aeries  f'1.. - 1 +1.. + 1.. + ... 
                                                                                     :;sn                  2        3 
             diverges. For whenever n - 2t.,. we have 
                                                                     111 
                        c&.+1+G.+I+  .. • +ca,.- ",+1  +  ",+2  +  ... +fi" 
                                                              ~1..+1..+ ... +1...,,;.1..-1.. 
                                                                  ""                          "              ,,2' 
             contrary  to the condition of the propoiition. 
                                  ..               .. 
                     (I)    1/ E ca,. cmd E 6. on CMWer,ent aeria  0/ ,etJl number., lAm U&. 
                         ..      _1               ... 
             Nriu  E (ca,. + 6.) u e&lao couergeAt cmd                           . 
                        -I 
                                                 <It                     .... 
                                                E (ca,. + 6.) - E ca,. + E b •• 
                                               ...                      _ ... 
                     (I)     1/  It IIa i. II  couergeAt  atria  0/ retJl "umber. tmtI c E R, lAm 
                     The  proposition  is immediate  from  the  third  propoiition  of  13 of 
              Chapter  III  (page 48) . 
                         .. 
              atria  E ca,. c:tnaVerfIU  or it .w tJrbitrGriz" large panitJl IUfIII • 
                        • -1 
                     For  the  sequence of partial luml  is increasing, hence convergent  in 
              caae it il bounded from above. 
               1"  VB.  JNTZlICIIANO& 01' LDlJT OPIIBATJOIfll 
               PropotJition  (Compar"on  tat).                                        If  t a.. and  t b. lire infinite uri,. 
                                                                                             __ I                  .. -1 
               of real number88uch  that 111 .. 1 ~ b .. for n  = 1,2,3,  ...  and  t  b. converga, 
                                                                                                                                 .-1 
                      , For let E be any real number greater than zero. By the fint proposition 
               of this section there  is a positive integer N such that  if n >  m ~ N then 
                                                           Ib",+1 + b .. + + ... + b.1 < E. 
                                                                                 1 
               Thusifn>m~Nthen 
                                  1~1 + ~I + ... + a.. I ~ 111".+11 + 1110.+11 + ... + 1a..1 
                                                                                    ~ b00+ + bOO+ + ... + b. < E • 
                                                                                               1              I 
                                                                                             ... 
                Thus, by the proposition just quoted,  I: IIa is convergent. 
                                                                                           .-1 
                Corollary.                Uruhr the condititma of the propoaititm, 
                                                                          tllal~tb.. 
                                                                       I 
                                                                          a-I                •• 1 
                         Each partial sum 111 + lit + ... + a.. is such that 1111 + lit + ... + llal ~ 
                 lall + 11111 + ... + IIIaI ~ b + bt + ... + b. ~ t b., and since the closed 
                                                                     1 
                                                                                                              _1 
                interval [- t b., t b.] contains each partial sum III + lit + ... + a.. it 
                                       --I           •• 1 
                also contains the limit t CIa of these partial sums. 
                                                            a-I                                                                     -
                Definition.                 If II., /It, lIa,  •••  are real numbers, the series  I: IIa is aid to 
                                                                                                                                   a-I 
                be  absolutely  corwer,mt, or  COfWIr'ge  absolutely,  if  the  eeriea t  IIIaI  ia 
                convergent.                                                                                                                 a-I 
                   ...   According to  the  proposition  before last,  a  series of  real  numbers 
                  1: IIa is absolutely convergent if and only if the set of partial sums of the 
                  .-1 
                             CD 
                            __ I 
                series 1: I a.. I is bounded. By the comparison test an absolutely convergent 
                series is convergent.  The  (',omparison test  is actually  a  test  for absolute 
                 convergence, and the following "ratio test"  is essentially a special cue of it. 
                                                             12. urn.......... 145 
        Prop08ition  (Ratio  teat).    11 t  a. u on  inJi,ni/.e feria  01 rumuro  real 
                                          a-I 
        number. and il there ezi8t.  a number p < 1 auc1a that I ,,-+1/a.1 :S P lor  GIl 
        nU/icientl1l large n.  then the Beriu ~ ab8oluIel,. 111,,-+1/a.1 ~l/or 
        aU 814f/icientl1l large A. the BerNs diverges. 
             For the proof we may replace the phraaea "for alleufticiently  larp A" 
        by "for  aU A". since lopping off the  first few tenna of the aeri.  does not 
        affect its convergence. Then if  1,,-+1/a.1 S p < 1 we have 
                          10,,+11 S pIa.l S pi I a.-II S .•• S palall, 
        80  the  absolute  convergence of t a. follows from  comparieon  with  the 
                                          a-I 
        geometric seri.  I all +  p I all +  pi I all +  ....  On the other  hand,  from the 
        atatement  10,,+1/0,,1 ~ 1 comes the fact 
                             /0,,+11 ~ 1a.1 ~ I a.-I I ~ ...  ~ lall. 
        80  the sequence ai, CIt, Oa,  •••  doea not have aero .. ita limit,  proviDl that 
         the aeries diverges. 
                                                     • 
         Corollary.   11 the Berie. 01 real number. I: a. i. auc1a that lim ',,-+I/a.1 
                                                    .. -1              .... 
         exi.t.  and ia luI than (greater than) one then the Beriu COJ&VeTgeI abaolut.lll 
         (diverge.) • 
             For if the limit ia leaa than  1 we may take  the p of the proposition  to 
         be any  number between this limit and  I, while if the limit is greater  than 
         one the proposition is directly  applicable. 
             The series 
                                  1-~+~-~+ ... 
                                       234 
         ia an example of a series of real numbers that is convergent without beblc 
         absolutely  convergent.  The aeri.  is not abaolutely  converpnt  Iince the 
                                                       -
         corresponding  series  of abeolute  values  is I: l/n,  the  harmonio  __ , 
                                                      .-a 
         which is known to be divergent;  the convergence of the .... it • nault of 
         the following more pneral  atatement  on "alternating"  aeriee. 
         Propoa'tion.    Let ai, fit, Oa, •••  be a decr~ ~ 0/ ~ AumlHn 
         converging to zero. Then the Beria 
                           t (-1)-1 CIa - Cll - fit + Oa - a. + ... 
                          .-a 
         ~ to some poritive number luI than Cll. 
         1~  ....  III"J'IIJICIIAIfGII  01' LlIlO'l'  0 .... '1'10". 
              Any partialaum  of the above aeries can be written 
                                                         - a,.            if  niB even 
                                                  { a.-. 
               (01 - a.) + (ae - a.) + . . . +  <a.-I - a,.-s) + a,.  if  n is odd, 
         which ie a aum of nonnegative  numbers, hence nonnegative, and this partial 
         sum can also be written 
                                (                   { -<a.-I  - a,.)           if •  ie odd 
             At - (0. - ae) -    04 - ae) - ... +  _ (a.-. _ a.-s)  - a,.  if. ie even, 
         which ie at moet 01. That ie, each partial  aum ie located  in  (0, G~. If we 
         delete the filSt few terms of an alternatinl  aeriea we are left  withplua  or 
         min1l8  UlOther alternatinl  aeriea, 80 for any positive integelS n > m we have 
                 llil (-1)..-""1-"-+.-"-+1+"-+1 - ... =a,.I~,,-+ •• 
                                       1
         Since  Um .. - 0,  the  aeriea  ~ (-I)"-lea,.  converpa.  Each  partial  aum 
                -                          = 
         U. in the cbecl interval (0, G~. The aum of the aeriea ie not  sero since 
         the  putial  IUma (G. - a.) + (ae - 04) + ... + (0.-1 - a...)  are  increu-
         iDe IIId positive  for  large ft,  and  the  sum  ie Ieee than Gl  aince it equala 
         At-(o.-ae+a.-Clt+             ... ) <GI.Thus 
                                       • 
                                      E (-I)-lea,.  E  (0, Gs) • 
                                      ..... 
              Note tbM thia  reault impli.  the aeemincl1 atronger reault that  the 
         diI..- heW_ the sum of the aeri.                                      . 
                                      CIa  -o.+ae  -a.+'" 
         and ita ft- partial aum is Ieee than ""+. in abeolute value, aince this difference 
         ie apin an alternating  aeriea. 
              The main  properties  01 abeolutely  converpnt  aeriea, proved  in  the 
         next two propositiona, are that their terms may be rearranged  in any order 
         or ftIl'Oupecl in any way without  affecting the converpnce  or the 8ums of 
          the aeri •• This  makes it poI8ible to perfonn  many kinde of manipulations 
          with these aeri.  without  concern about  converpnce  problemll, a fact that 
         does not hold for aeri.  that are converpnt  but not  absolutely  convergent 
          (cf. Problem I'). 
         PropoRdon.        1M /: 11,2, 3, ... t -     11,2,3, ... t be  a  function that ia 
                                         • 
         OJIHU  ad 01lI0. Tlaen if E a,. ia an  abaolulelll convergent m'iu  of real 
                                - ..... 
         ....".,."  IAe __ E G" .. , ia ,.,. abaolulelll convergent and 
                               ..... 
                                                                                   12. Ilfnlflftl  _           1'7 
                  For  AllY  positive  integer  ra.  the numben  /(1)./(2)  •...• /(ra)  are  a 
           IRlbeet of  1, 2, •.. , N,  for  lOme N.  Thus  any  partial  lum  of  the  aeries 
             .                                                                                  -
            I: I 01(.) I is 1888 than or equal to a partial  lum of the aeries L I 0.1. Since 
            .-t                                                                                .-1 
           the  latter  aeries converges ita  partial  IUmB are  bounded,  hence al80 the 
                                                 •                                                        • 
           partial  IUmB of the aeries I: I a"a) I are bounded.  ThUl the aeri88 L a"a) 
                                                .-t                                                      --' 
           is abaolutely convergent.  We know that 
                                        .               - -
                                        L 01(.) - La'''  L (0/(.)  - a.) 
                                       __ I            _-I         .... 
           and we aba1l complete  the  proof by Ihowing  that  the latter  8um is zero. 
           For any t  > 0 choose a positive integer N luch that  whenever n > m ~ N 
           we have  I CI.o+a I + 1000+11 + ... + 10.1 < t.  Then  choose N'  luch  that  all 
           the numbers  1,2,  •.. , N are included among /(1). 1(2),  .. . ,/(N').  Clearly 
           N' ~ N. If ra > N'  we have 
           where 81 coats of those intepns/(1),/(2),                        •. . ,/(n)  which do not occur 
            &mODI 1, 2, ••• , ra,  while 8. coDBiBta of  tru.e  integen  1, 2, .•. , ra  which 
            do not occur among 1(1), 1(2), ..• , I(ra). Clearly 8a and 8. have no element 
            in common and neither includes any of the numbers 1. 2 •.•• , N. 10 that. 
            B VSaC IN + I, N + 2, .•. ,Ml for lOme M. ThUl for ra > N' we have 
              1    l!i (0/(.)  -    CIt) I S i~&VBtICltI s laN+l1 + I~N+.I + ... + 10.,1 < to 
            This proV88 that t (0/(.)  - a.) == O. 
                                    a_I 
                  If 8  is  a  Bet and  cp: 8 -         R  a  function  then  the  expl'e88ion of cp(.) 
                                                                                                          ~ 
            is well~efined in C&8e 8 is finite. This expl'e88iOIl can 8Ometim88 be given a 
            meanilll.  independent  of any ordering of 8, if 8 is infinite. In fact if 8 can 
            be put in one-one correspondence with  the  natural  numben  and  if in 80 
            doing we obtain an abaolutely convergent aeries then we can define li cp(.) 
            to  be  the BUm  of that  aeries. More  precisely, if I: (I, 2,3,  ... 1-8 is a 
            function  that  is one-one onto  and  if t cp(f(ra» is absolutely  convergent. 
                                                     -           _-t 
            then we define ~ cp(.) to be L cp(f(ra» (which by the  lut  proposition  is 
                                 ~                   _-t 
            independent  of the  choice of I). 
         148   m. INTBBCIfANGB  or LIMIT OI'BBATlON8 
              Rpecial CIUIeII of infinite  sets  8  which  can  be  put  in  one-one  corre-
         spondence with 11,2,3,  ... J are 
         (1)  any infinite subset  of the natural  numbers  (for the elementa of such a 
              set can be written  down in their  natural  order) 
         (2)  the  set of all ordered  pairs  I (n, m) : n, m -    I, 2, 3, .•• J of  natural 
              numbers  (which can be written  down in the order 
              (1,1), (1,2), (2,1), (1,3),  (2,2),  (3, I),  (1,4),  (2,3),  (3,2),  (4,1),  .•. ) 
         (3)  any  infinite let  of disjoint  nonempty  subseta of the  natural  numben 
              (which can be written  down in the order of their ema1leet elemental. 
               The followilll result  says that  the terms of an absolutely  converpnt 
         aeries may be regrouped in any fashion without  .,ttering  the abeolute con-
         vergence or the sum . 
                                 • 
          Propoaition.      Let L all be an absolutely convergent Nria  0/ real number. 
                                II_I 
          mad let 8 ,8.,8.,  ...  be a aequence (Jinm  or in.JiniU) 0/ dUJoint nonemply 
                    1
          .,. 0/ natural number. tDhoae union 8 U 8. U 8. U  . ..  it 1M fJI&tire .. 0/ 
                                                     1 
          natwal  number.  11,2,3,  •.. J.  Then lor  each i  tuM  tIuJt 8, it infiniU 1M 
          feria .~ a.. it abtolutely convergent, if the number 0/ .. B , Ss, 8., ...  it 
                                                                             1
          infinite then U&e.me. t ( r  a..) it ab80lutely convergent, twl in _II cme 
                                   _1   .et 
                                     '-1ft ... (.tf, a..) - ~ a... 
               For any  infinite subset  8  of  11,2,3,  ... J, ordered  in  a l8QUenae in 
          any fashion, each partial  sum of the series ria..l  is 1_ than or equal to 
                                             .             .~ 
                                             __ I 
          some partial  sum of the series L I a..1. Since the partial  IUms of the latter 
          series are bounded, so are the partial  sums of r  I a..1. Thus  L a.. is abso-
                                                              .. ~             .. eB 
          lute1y convergent. Thus  L a.. makes sense for any subset Bell, 2, 3, ••. J • 
          We claim that              • eB 
           This is clear if eitHer Bl or 8. U B. U  . "  is a finite let.  On the other hand 
           if  both  B1 and  B. U B. U  .. ,  are  infinite  then  we can  order  them  into 
           sequences and then  use part  (1) of the second proposition  of this section 
           to get the same result. Thus,  by repeated  application  of this idea, 
                                                                      12. I"nlll'l'll una.    1. 
                      -···-~a.+ra.+···+ra.+                                      ~  a. 
                                 .U..EI.                       .EL         ....... ~ .. 
         in cue there happen to be at least " leta 8., 8., Sa, •••. We are clone, ~ 
         in  the  case  where  the  number  of eeta 8., Sa, Sa, • ••  is infinite, where i' 
          remains  to show  that  the  aeries  ~ ( .li a.) is abeolutely  oonverpn' 
          and  that  ita  lum  is t a.. To  prove that  it converpB  to the IUIIl t a. 
                                  .-t                                                       .... 
          it IUftiCes to Ihow that 
                                       lim         r         a.-O . 
                                       .... ..... .tJI~ ... 
          To do this,  for  any  1 > 0 chooee a positive  intepr  H lOCh tbat  if "  > 
          m ~ N then  10.+11 + I Go.+.1 + ... + I a.1 <. and then chooIe H' moh that 
          11,2, .. . ,HI C 81 U8.U  ... U8N'.  If now" > N' then  the  abeolute 
          value of any partial  8WD of the infinite aeries              r         a. (aldOl  the 
                               -                                 .u .. .tJI .. 'IJ. .. 
          terms of this  series to be in  any  fixed order  at &11)  is at most. .~ I a.I, 
          where 8' is lOme finite subset of  IN + I, H + 2, H + 3, •.. 1, hence it ie 
          at most  I aN+11 + I aN+t I + ... + I aM 1 for IIOtne M  > H, hence is 1_ than 
          I.  Thus  the  above limit  is indeed aero and ~ ( .~ a.) indeed OOIlvelpl 
              .  .                                                                   . 
          to 1: a.. Applyinl  thi.  to  the  absolutely  convergent  aeri-1:  1a.1, we 
             _.                                                                     .... 
          see tbat ~ (.~ 1 .. 1) is convergent.  Since  I.~ 0.1 S ._10.1 for all 
          i-I, 2, 3, ... , the comparison teat .howe that !: ( .~ a.) is &bIoIutel,. 
          eonvqent.  This eompletea the proof. 
                For infinite series of real-valued  functions  on a metric apace we have 
          the  following resulta,  all immediate  consequenCe8 of the definitiODl and 
          resulta of preceding sections. 
                                                    • 
           Propoaicion..     Tit.  ifl/i1&ite .,,;u 1: I. oJ ,...,..,.luetl /wtt:lWU 011 ...... 
                                                   • -t 
           IfNI"  E  eonver," un(formlJ (f mad 01&1, ii, "",,.,  • > 0, .....  ..." 
           em integer N IUCA IIuJt (f 1& > m ~ H Uaen 
                                 "-+1(1') + I-+h)  + ... + /.(,>1 < • 
          Jor aU 1'E E. 
        III   'fII.  ~G. OF LUIIT 0 .... onON8 
                                  -
             The infinite aeries E I. of real-valued  functions  on a  metric space  E 
                                 ....a 
        illaid  to C01IfHII'P Gbaolulely if the series I:,I.(P) is  absolutely  convergent 
        lor each p E B. -                           .-a 
         0w0IIary.     II E I • .. em irVinit. "" ... 01 ret&l-vGlued luneliou on a mdric 
                         ....a 
                       -
        .,.,.  E and 1: a. a c:onHrferat ..,....  01 real numbfr.  lucia that I/.(P) I Sa. 
                      ....a              -
        lor  all p E B aM all ft, IIaen E I. ~ abIoluIay and uniformly • 
                             -          ....a 
         Propo8ldon.      II E/ •.. a uniforml'll ~ ""ia 01 continUOtU real-
                            .... 
         DGlutd ~ Oft a metric "'* E IIaen ill .m .. a continuou function 
         _E.                                          -
         P .... 'don.     II  a," E  R,  a < b,  and E I • ..  a  uniformly  ~ 
                                                     .-a 
         __ 0/ COIItinUOtU real-tIalutl ItmdilJu Oft [a, b) IIaen 
                              r. (~/. )(aI).  - ~ r. 1.(aI)=. 
         PrOJHMlcf.oft.  1M 11. II, la, .•.  be a ~ 01 real-uGlued luneliom Oft an 
         open inWval  U ift R, eac:A Iuwi"" a contiftUOtU derivative. 8uppole  that tI&e 
                        • 
         inflnit. .,;u EN etmfIef'geI  uniformly  on U and tMt lor  lOmB  a E  U tI&e 
                - .-a                                -
         .,;u E I.(a) conHrfCI.  Tiaen tI&e ""ia E I.  ~ to a difftll'eratiable 
               .-a                                   •• 1 
         fwt,t;Wm on U aM                . )'  -
                                       (E/.  - E/.'. 
                                         _1         .-a 
                                                                 I S.  POWER SERIES. 
              Let a, e., Ct, Ct, •••  be real numbel'll. The aeries of real-valued functions 
         onR            -
                       1: c,.(aI - a)· - Co + el(:': - a) + ea(:.: - a)1 + ... 
                       ... 
          ill eaUed a ,..,. __ (in powel'll of z - a). 
                                                                             I I.  I'OWIIJlIUl"     lSI 
                To avoid meIIIIY circumlocutiolll, one a.lao calla the above expreuion 
          .. power aeries when :e is not  the identity  function on R but rather lOme 
          specific element of R. 
                The first  question about  power series is for which :e E R  the series 
          conv8l'les. Here  are  three  examples, all  verified by  the  ratio  testj  the 
          immediately following theorem userta  that  these examples are typical. 
                                    t.::... conv8l'les for all :e E  R • 
                                   ... ", 
                                    -
                E:Jwm.II 2.         1::e-     conv8f1e8 if l:el < 1, div8f1e8 if  l:el ~ 1. 
                                   ~ 
                                     • 
                E:Jwm.II 3.         1: n I:e- converges if z ..; 0, div8l'lee for all other :e. 
                                    ~ 
           Theorem.  [lor 0 ,wm potM'  -w I: c..(z - 0)· 0t&8 01 the lollofIJing it 
          ",.,:                                            ~ 
                (1)  2'A. ItIJf'ia ctlt&fJCf'fu takoluUly lor oil z E R. 
                (I)  2' .. e:riaCa 0  reol number r > 0 ad that the aeriu corwergu ab.o-
           luUl, lor oil z E R ad tIaat I z - a I < r and divergu  lor aU :e  auch that 
           Iz -ol>r. 
                 (8)  2'Ae ItJf'iu conIHlr'fU mal" if z - a. 
           [lUf'tIwmore, lor em" rl < r in CON ('), or lor an arbitrary  rl ERin CtJ46 (l), 
           1M ~ ill uniform lor aU z ad that Iz - al ~ rl. 
                      For suppose that  the aeries converges for z .. ~, for lOme ~ ,-E a, 
                                                                           -
           and  let  0 < b < I ~ - a I.  We  aha1l  show  that  E  c..(z - a)- converges 
                                                                          ... 
           abeolutely and uniformly for all z such that  I z - a 1 S b. To do tbia, note 
           that  eince ~ c..(~ - a)·  conV8f1e8 ~e have  lim c..(~ - a)- - 0, 80  that 
                          =-                                           --
           there exists a number M such that  I c..(~ - a)· I S M for all n. If I z - a I S b 
           then        1c..(z-a)·I"Ic..(~-a)-I·1 ~=: ,- ~M·I ~~a ,-. 
           But t MI bl(f :- a) I- is a pometric  ~riea with ratio I bl(f  - a) 1 < 1, 80 
                 ~ 
           by comparieon with  this  aeries t c..(z - a)- converges absolutely  and 
                                                     ~ 
           uniformly for all z such that  Iz -al S b.  Now consider the set S of all 
         1St    VII.  INTIIIIICJL\NOII 0 .. LIMIT  OPIlRATlONB 
                                           .. 
         E E  R  such  that  the  seriesL  c,,(E - a)"  converges. It may  happen  that 
                                          .... 
         8 - (ai,  which is po88ibiJity (3) above.  It may  happen  that  the set 8  is 
         unbounded,  in which C88e for every '1 E  R there exists a E E 8 such that 
         '1 <I E - al and  what we have already  shown proves that we are in C88e 
          (1) above. The last  po8IIibiJity is that  8 is bounded, 8  pili  (al.  Here we set 
         ,  -l.u.b.  fiE - al: E E  81. Then,  > 0, the series diverp8  if Iz - al >', 
          and  for  any  '1 < , there  is a  E E  8  such  that  '1 < Ie - 01, 10  that  the 
          series converps  absolutely and uniformly for all z such that  Iz - 01 ~ rt. 
          Since '. WM any number Iell than ,  this proves that C8M (2) obtains. 
               The number,  of case (2) is called the radiua oj cmwergence of the given 
          power series, the interval  (a - "  0  +,) the interlltll  oj convergence. In C&8eII 
          (1),  (3)  we also use the  expression "radius  of convergence",  meaning  by 
          this the symbol  •  or the number  lero respectively. 
               If a power series baa radius of convergence,  "  0, CIt,  it  may  or  may 
          not converge at the extremities a - " a + , of the interval  of convergence j 
          for example the power series 
                                             ~  z'        z' 
                                      zI-"2+3"  -4"+ "', 
                                             zI    zI     ~ 
                                       z-"2+3"-4"+  "', 
          and 
                                            z+zI+zI+  ... 
          all  have  interval  of convergence (-1,1)  and  the  fil'Bt conveJ'les at both 
          extremities,  the second at one but not the other,  and  the third  at neither 
          extremity. 
           Lemma.  Let t c,,(x - a)" be a power W'ieB tDitIa  ,odiUll oj  ~ 
                            .... 
           r  (pouibly  r =  0  or  ,  =  III).  Then the aeries 
                                             t nc,,(z - a)-· 
                                             .... 
                                           t ~(z - a}·+1 
                                           ....  n+l 
           aho luJve radiua oj convergence ,. 
                We  shall  fil'Bt  show  that  if  the  series t c.(:z: - a)·  converges  for 
                                                                 ..... 
           % = E pili 0, then the other two series converge for all :z: such that  I:z: - a I < 
                                                                                                                                                                        13. 1'0"''''''                                      III 
                                                                                                                                                                     .. 
                       ,~ -         a ,. As in the proof of the last theorem,  since 1: c.(E - a)· conVerpl 
                                                                                                                                                                  .... 
                      the  terms  of this  series approach  zero, hence are bounded, 10  there ate 
                     a number  14 such that  1c.(E - a)"1 S 14 for all ft.  ThUl 
                               n  (:z: _ a)"-'I=  nlc.(E - a)" I I.!...=!!.. I-I <                                                                                         •                I.!..=.!..\-I 
                             '      c..                                                   , E - al                             E - a                          - IE - al  E - a 
                      and similarly                                                                             . 
                                                                  ~(:z: _ a)-+II < MIE - all.!.=..!.llI+l. 
                                                               I   n+l                                                -           _+1                         f-a 
                      To show that  the  series t ftC.(:z: - a),,-I and  t                                                                                                  c.+ 1  (z -                  a)1I+1 con-
                                                                                            .....                                                           ....  n 
                      verge if  I:z: - a I < I ~ - a I it therefore  suffices to show that  the series 
                                                                                                at            nM  I z -a I-I 
                                                                                              ~ IE -AI  E -a 
                      and                                                                      t  MIE - all.!.=..!.11I+1 
                                                                                              .....           n+l                         ~-a 
                       converge, which is easily accomplished  using the ratio  test. 
                                               .. 
                       Thus  if 1: c.(:z: - a)"  has radius  of convergence  r,  then  either of the  two 
                                             .-11 
                       series obtained  from  this  one by "differentiating  term  by term" or "inte-
                       grating  term by term"  has radius of convergence at leut r. But the orilinal 
                                         ..                                                                                                                                     .. 
                       series 1: c.(x  - a)"  can  be  obtained  from  the  series 1: tac.(a: - a)·-I by 
                                       .....                                                                                                                                 . ... 
                       integrating  term  by  term  (except  for  the  term  for  n - 0)  and from  the 
                       series  t                         C+..  1  (z  -               a),,+1 by differentiating  term by term, eo the previous 
                                         ..... n 
                       argument  applies in reverse, showing that the radius of convergence of the 
                       original  series  is at. least  that  of either  of  the  two  othen.  Thus  all  three 
                       series have the same radius of convergence r . 
                                                                                                                       .. 
                        Theorem.                            11 tI&e  power wi-. 1: c.(:z: - a)"  Au  ratl .. 0/ ~ 
                                                                                                                    .... 
                        r> 0 (polftbly  r = CD)  tAen tI&e ItIftCtUm I Oft  (a - r, a + r)  (or Oft  •• V 
                        r-CD)giHnbu 
                        u diJlerentiGbk. Furtl&ermore lor flRY z E (a - r, a + r) (or:z: E ., Vr -                                                                                                                             CD) 
                        w1&mJe 
                                 I'(z)  ..  t nc..(:z: - a)"-'                                                  tmd  J: J(t).  -                                   ~ n ~ 1 (z - a)II+'. 
                                                         ..... 
         1M  YD.  IMTIIBCIIANOS  or LlIIIT  OPSlU.TlON8 
               By the lemma the three series involved have the  same radius of con-
          vergence ,. Pick any  positive  number  '1 < ,. Then  each series converges 
          unifonnly  on [a - '1, a + ,~ by the last  theorem.  By the last  proposition 
          of the laat section we have 
                       _                ,_                       ,     GD 
                    ( l: e:,.(z -  a)")  -   l: (e:,.(z - a)")  ... l: nc,.(z - a)"-1 
                      -                      "...                    -
          on  (a - '1, a + r~. Similarly  the  result  on  term-by-term  integration  for 
          z E [a - r"  a + r1l foOows from the immediate  predecessor of the  quoted 
          propoeition. Since rl was any positive number Iell than"  these same resulta 
          are true on (a -', a + r). 
                Let a, ee, Ct, Ct, ...  be real numbers. We say that a real-valued function 
          /on an open aubeet of R Iaoa the potHr aerie. ezpanaion t c,,(z - a)" there if 
                                                    •                      -
                                          /(z)  -  l: e:,.(z -  a)" 
                                                   -
          lor all z in the open aubeet. In this case /' exista on the open subeet and has 
          a power series expansion there, and similarly for 1", /"', etc. In fact, from 
                /(z)  - Ce + Ct(z - a) + Ct(z - a)1 + c.(z - a)1 + c,(z - a)' + ... 
           foUcnn 
                      /'(z)  - OJ + 2oa(z - a) + 3ct(z - a)· + 4 c.(z - a)' + "', 
                      I"(s)  - 20a + 2 • 3ct(z - a) + 3 • 4 c.{z - a)1 + ... , 
                      /"'(s)  - 2 • 3ct + 2 • 3 • 4 c.(z - a) + ... , 
                      P")(z)  - ftle:,. + .. '. 
           For s  - a (assuming this point to be in the open set on which / is defined) 
           we pt /(a) - ee,1'(a) - cl'/"(a)  - 2Ct,/"'(a)  - 2 • ac., ... , 1',,) (a) - ftle:,.. 
           We reetate these reeulteu  follows. 
           Corollary.      1/ the fu'nctitm / Iaoa the potHr  aeriu  ezpanaion t  c,.(z - a)" 
                                                                                    " .. 
           Oft ... 0JHft __ 0/ R e1aat ccmtaim a, then /Iaoa ccmtiftuou, derivativu 0/ aU 
           0If'dtn Oft lAw 0JHft aubM and e:,. - p")(a)/ftl/or  aU ft. 1ft particular, i/ J 1uu 
           •  JJOtM' ......  apataaicm in power. 0/ z - a then tA .. potHr  aerie ... Uftique. 
                                                                         13.  I'OWD"'"          lSI 
               For any  real-valued  function 1 defined on an open aubeet of R that 
         containa  a and poIIIIe8Bing derivatives  of all orders  at a. the power aeriee 
                                            t I'->(G) (31 - a)· 
                                            _      ftl 
          is ealled the TG?J1or tItIf'iu 011 at 1M point a. 
               'Ex.ulPLII.  If 1311 < 1 then 1/(1 + 31) - 1 - 31 + Z' - 31'+ .. '. There-
          fore 
                Jog (1 + 31)"  {a ~ .... 31 - Z' + 31' - ~ + ...  if 1311 < 1 
                                  J.  1 + t            2     3      4                        . 
          Ie this power lleriee representation  of log (1 + 31)  valid  for other  values of 
          311 Certainly  not for  1%1> 1. for then  the aeries divergee (and furthermore 
          log (1 + 31) is not defined  for z < -1).  Certainly  not  if z ..  -1.  for  the 
          8&Dle reuoD8.  But if z .. 1 the aeries converges. Does it converge to log 21 
          The anawer is flU. that is. it is true that 
                                                  111 
                                   log 2 -1-2'+3'-4'+  .... 
          but this statement  needs proof. Since a uniformly convergent aeries of c0n-
          tinuous  functiona  baa a  continuous  8um and  the  function  log (1 + %)  is 
                                                                               -
          continuous  at z - 1. it 8uffices to show that  the aeriee L (-I)--lz"/ft  is 
                                                                               ..... 
          uniformly  convergent  for  z E  (0. 1). This  is true  since  the 8um  of  any 
          number  of coDleCutive terms 8tarting  with  the ftlA baa abeolute  value  at 
          most za/ft S l/ft.  since for 0 < z S 1 we have an alternating  Bee. 
                Suppose now that 1 is & real-valued function on an open interval  in R 
           containing  a and that 1 baa derivativee  of all ordem. When doeel  have & 
           power series expansion in powem of % - a1 That  is. when is it true  that 
                    -
          I(z)  -   E/(")(a)(z  - a)-/nl?  Reverting  to  a  previous  notation  (end  of 
           ChapterV). -
                 I(z)  _ I(G) + l'(a)~1 - a)  + ... + r·)(CI)~ - a)- + R .. (z. a) • 
                                                 • 
           we see  that  we  have  I(z)  -       EI'·)(a)(z  - a)-/nl  for  &ny  particular  z 
                                                .... 
           if and only if lim R.(z. a)  - O. This can be & useful criterion. 8ince 'raylor'8 
                           -
           theorem gives us some practical  information on R .. (z, a). 
               156        VII.  INTIlRCRANOII  01' LIMIT  OPIIRATION.                                                               ... 
                        EXAMPLE.                The Taylor  seriee of e" at  the  point 0 is E ~ /n I. Tbie 
                                                                                                                                   ..... 
               seriell converges for all 2: E R. By Taylor's theorem we can write R.(~, 0) -
               ,,%,*I/(n  + 1) I , where E is lOme number between 0 and z. Since e" is an 
               increasing function we have                                                .'8' 2:  -+1 
                            ...                                  IR.(z,O)I~  n+l)1 
               Since E z"/nl  converps,  lim z·+I/(n  + 1)1 - O.  Thus  lim R.(z, 0) - 0 
                           ....                                      ....                                                       a40t 
               and  therefore                                                           ...   ~ 
                                                                            e"" E-
                                                                                      .....  nl 
               for alI zE R. 
                                                                           14.  THE TRIGONOMETRIC FUNCI'lONS. 
                         We want to define the trigonometric functions and derive their stand-
                ard  properties  in a  rigoroUs manner.  The  usual  geometric way of doing 
                this,  using angles and  arll length,  relies on intuition,  but it is possible to 
                make this method entirely logical. However it is much simpler to use an 
                altemate  approach. We shall confine the discU88ion to the sine and cosine 
                functions,  since  all  the  other  trigonometric  functions,  as  well as  their 
                inverses, may be got from these. 
                         We look for real-valued  functions  on R  that  are  everywhere twice 
                differentiable and satisfy the differential equation 
                                                                               I" - -I. 
                         II  such  a  function I  exists, from  the  equation  /" ... -I we deduce 
                I'" - -I', 80 that I is three times differentiable, then we get I(t)  ..  -I" ... 
                I, 80  that  I  is  four  times  differentiable.  From  I(t) "" I  we get PI)  = 1', 
                PI) "" /" ""  -I, 1('1) =  -I', PI)  =  -/" "" I, etc. Thus I has derivatives of 
                all orden  and its Taylor series at the point 0 is 
                                        1(0) + I'(O)z  - 1(0) zI _  1'(0) z' +  1(0) z' +  ... 
                                                                           21                 31                  41                     . 
                 For any particular z po! 0, Taylor's  theorem givee us the estimate 
                                                                                        IC.+I)(E) 
                                                                 R,,(z, 0) -             (n + 1)fZ,,+1 
                 for lOme E between 0 and  z.  Letting  M  be an uppet  bound  for  1/(E) I, 
                 I/'(E) I for  E ranging over  the  closed interval  with  extremities 0  and  z, 
                 we have 
                                                                       14 ...... OOIIOIIaftIO  I'UIIG'IIOIII     III 
           Thus  lim R.(z, 0)  - o. A. a consequence,  if a function  /  with the _red 
                    .-
           properties  exista, it is equal  to ita Taylor  18ri. for all z E R. 
                  For any el, es E  R the 18ri. 
                                                      e,;eI      0tZ'       ~ 
                                     Ca + f:tZ -     Y-ar +""ir + ... 
           converpl!l  for  all  z E  R,  U  will  be ... by  comparieon  with  the  __ 
                              -
           (Iell + lesl) 1: Islw/nl. Takinl  es - 0, es - 1 we  are led  to  de&oe the 
                             ... 
           sine function  ain by 
                                           •               11'     z'      Z7 
                                         I!I1nz -    z  -  31 +51 - 71 + ... 
           and takiDl el - I, es - 0 we define the coaine function  COl by 
                                                           zI      zt      11' 
                                         COl z - 1 - 2i + 41 - 61 + .... 
           The  functiona  ain  and  COB  are  defined  on  all  of  R.  Ditrerentia\iDl  their 
           series term  by term  lives 
                                      Ii    .                     Ii                  . 
                                     d:e  mn z - COl z,  di' COB z -              -1Ul z.  :. 
            Thus  ain  and  COB  both  satisfy  tho  equation  I" - -/ and any  lunetlon 
           /: R -     R that satisfies  this  equation  mUit  be of the form 
                                                /(z)  -   elCOU +e,linz 
            for certain  conatanta  el, es E R. 
                  It follows immediately  from the l8ries expanaiona that 
                                             ainO - 0,                    COlO  -1 
                                      ain (-z)  -      -sin z,  COl (-z)  - COl z. 
                    ts (ain' z + coe' z)  - 211in s -k aiD z + 2 COl s';' COl.  -                            0, 
            10 that ain' z + COB's is conatant.  Since aiD'O + _0 - 1 we ... 
                                                    ain's  + coeI. - 1. 
                   To derive  the familiar addition  formulae, fix IOJD8 a e R. TbeD . 
                          ! ain (s + a) - COI(S +a) ! (z+ a) - COI(z+a) 
            and       ! COl (z + a) - -ain (z + a)~ (z + a) - -aiD (s + a), 
                  111           'f'II.   IIft'8IICBAJIOJI  01'  LbIIT  OPllaATlON8 
                  eothat 
                                                                      dI sin (x + a)                                 .     (  +  ) 
                                                                                  dzI                   = -SID  X                      a. 
                  Hence we can write 
                                                                      lin (x + a)  - ClOO8 X + Cs sin x 
                  for Certain Cl, Cs E R. Differentiating  gives 
                                                                  COlI (:e + a)  -                   -c. sin:e + Cs con. 
                  Betting :e - 0 in the 1ut two equations  gives Cl - sin a, Cs - 008 a, 80 that 
                                                                 sin (:e + a) ... sin:e COlt a + con sin a 
                                                                COB (z + a) .... COB z 008, a  - sin z sin a. 
                              To derive  the periodicity  properties  ~f sin and  COB reason as followa: 
                   Iin:e > 0 if :e E  (0, 2), since then  all the expreaaions 
                                                                              :r;1       :r;1         Z7         :r;1          Zll 
                                                                   :e -'31' 5i -71'  DI-TII'  ... 
                   are positive.  Since d COlI :e/a -                                             -sin Z,  008 Z  is  a  decreasing  function  on 
                    (0,2).  Now 
                                                                                              111 
                                                               00II1-1--+---+···>0 
                                                                                             21           41           61                              ' 
                    while                                  21              2'            (2'                  2')                                           21              2' 
                           00II2-1--+--                                                     --- -···<1--+-<0 
                                                           21              41                 61              81                                            21              41               . 
                    It followa that  COII:e is aero at eome unique  point  of the  interval  (1,2). 
                    This unique  point  we denote  or/2 (this is a definition of or; note that at the 
                    moment  we have  only  the  rough  approximation  2 < or < 4). We deduce 
                    that on the interval  [0, or/2) COB:e decreases  from  1 to O. Since the deriva-
                    tive  of sin z  is COII:e, which  is positive  if  z E (0, or /2),  sin z  increases  on 
                                                                                                                                              l                   l 
                    this interval.  Using the facts  that Bin 0 .... 0 and sin z + cos X  ==  1, we see 
                    that  linx  incre&8el from  0  to  1 on  the  interval  [0, or/2). The  addition 
                    formulas then  sive 
                                                       ain  (:e + ; ) - COB:e,  COB  (z + ;) - - sin z. 
                     Repeated  application  of these  give sin (z + or) .... sin «x + or/2) + or/2) == 
                    .. ~ + or/2)- -ainz,  sin (z + 2or)- sin «x + or) + or) ... - Bin (x + 11")  -
                    •       a. Similady, or by differentiating  the last fonnula,  we get COB (x + 2or) = 
                     _:e. Ia other worda, sin and cos have period 2or. 
                                           15. DIn'mIDft4ftOIC  UND .. 'II1II ...... a.u. liON    119 
                             ,s. DIFFERENTIATION  UNDER THE INTEGRAL SIGN. 
               The result  we give  here is only  the  simplest  of a  number  of similar 
          resulta,  but  it is aIao the  most  uaeful and  ita  proof  is illustrative  of the 
          otherB. The notion of partial derivative  enters,  but only for convenien~ of 
          notation.  None of the properties  of partial ditterentiation  to be developed 
          in Chapter  IX will be used here, only the definition, which is eseentially a 
          one-variable  matter. 
                Let  U be a aubeet of BI with  the  property  that  for each s E  R  the 
          aubeet  of  R  given  by  1'1/ E  R  : (s, '1/) E  UI  is open.  That  ia,  U  ia  the 
          union of open aubeeta of vertical  lines in the plane  /II. Then  if I ia a real-
          valued function on U and (Zoo 'I/o) E  U, by 
                                                  *(:ro,'I/.) 
          we denote  the  derivative  at  'I/o of  the  function  sendinl  '1/  into  I(s., '1/), 
          provided  this derivative  exiata j that ia 
                                 lL(So  1/1) _  lim  I(So, '1/) -/(s.,1/.) 
                                  av'             .....        '1/-1/.         ' 
          if this limit  exista. If .!L (Sa, 1/1) exista for all (So, 1/0) E  U we have a real-
                                      av 
          valued  function  on U whose value at each  (Zoo 'I/o) E  U is lL (:ro, 1/.), and 
                                                                                    a1/ 
           we of coune denote  this function  by lL. 
                                                         a1/ 
           Theorem.        Lee G, b, c, d E  R, G < b, c < tl, tmtlllll  be G contimAotu real-
           lIGluecl juradMm em tile aubM 01 /II given bv 
                                  (:e, '1/) E /II : G :S :e :S b, c < '1/ < tll. 
           Su",..  tIaat  Z eNCa cmtl g  c:ontinuoua on tAg  ad.  flam  1M lunctitm 
           F: (c, tl) -+ R tleJin«l bv 
                                            F'(y)  -   L' Z (:e, 1/)u 
           lor aU 1/ E (c, tl). 
                 For a fixed 1/ E  (c, tl), both I and  al/ay are continuous  functions  of :e 
           for  :e E  (CI, b), 80 both  illtegrala  in  question  exist.  We  have  to  show that 
           160      vn.  INTERCHANGII  or LIMIT  OPllRATlON8 
            F'(yo)  exists and  is as indirAted for eallh Yo E  (c, d).  So let  Yo E  (e, d)  be 
           fixed. (''hOO8e numbers  c', d' such  that  c < c' < yo < d' < d. Then  the  set 
                                   8  =  (x, 1/) E  E' : x E  [a, b), 1/ E  [e', d']1 
           is compact,  80 that  the continuous  function  a! / ay is uniformly  continuous 
           on 8.  Given  any  I! > 0 choose 3 > 0 such  that  if (x, 1/) E  8,  (Xl, 1/.) E  8 
           and  v' (x - Xl)· + (1/ - 1/.)' < 3 then 
                                         I ~ (x, 1/) -      ~ (Xl, 1/.) 1 < b ~ a' 
            Wemay  assume  that  3 < min (Yo - e', tI' - Yol,  Then  if  1/ E  Rand 
            I, - rIol < 3  we  have  (x,1/) E  8  for  any  x E  [0, b).  If  in  addition  to 
            III -  1f.1 < 3 we  have  Y '" Ifo  then 
                        'M - '(1/0)  - f.t .!i....(x, 1/e)dx I 
                      I  II -1/0                 •  a1/ 
                                             .. I f.t (/(X, 1/)  - !(x, 1/0)  _  a! (x, 1/0)\'-1 
                                                   •             1/-1/0                 ay          r 
                                             = 1 J.. (:~ (x,,,)  -        :~ (x"ho) ~I 
            where"  (which depends on both x and 1/) is alw.tYB between 1/ and fie. (We 
            have  used  the  mean  value  theorem.)  But  v' (x - x)' + (" - 1/.)' == 
            I" -1/01 < 11/-1/01 < 3, 80  that 
                                         1 :    (x,,,)  -    :   (z, 1/0) I < b ~ 0 • 
            Thus                        F(1/) - '(Yo)  -        f. • .!i....(    '~-I < 
                                      1                              .:a..  z, YO/fUi   _  I! 
                                             Y - 110              •  "/I 
            if  Iy -   yol < 3,1/ "1/0.  Therefore 
                                F'(y  \  -   lim  F<II) - F<II.) -         f.t .!i....{x OJ 'dx 
                                      8J     .....      Y -1/.               •   ay  ,,8/       , 
            as was to be shown. 
            PROBLEMS 
              1.  Find  a  sequence of  continuou8 functions Jft: R -+ R  8Uch that  lim IimJ .. (z) 
                                                                                                       ..... -
                  and lim Jim/.(z)  exist and are unequal. 
                        -.... 
                                                                                 no8LIIIIB     161 
          2.  If !: E' -  1(0,0) I -  R,  three  limits we  can consider are  lim  lim !(a,  r), 
                                                                                 .....  -
              lim lim !(%,  1/), and    Um     !(%.  r).  Compute t.heee limite, if  they  exist, 
             -    ....               ( ••• >-11.1) 
              for !(%. r) - m' and for !(%, r) - ~ + ~. 
          3.  Find a sequence of continuous functional.:  [0, 1) -. R that  COIl~ to the 
              aero function and such that the sequence r. 11(.)., r. I.c.a>a. r. I.(a>a, ... 
              increaaea without bound. 
          4.  Find a uniformly convergent sequence of differentiable functional.:  (0, 1) .... R 
              such that the sequence fa', N, "', ... does not converge. 
           5.  Construct a convergent sequence of Riemann intearable real-valued functicma 
              on [0, 1) whose limit function ia not Riemann intearable. 
          6.  Prove the fonowinl fact.  implicitly used leVeraI times in the tat:  For &Dy 
              positive intapr  m, a eeriea of real numbers i:: a,. is CODVerpnt if and 0DIy if 
              ~ a..+. is convergent, and in that cue           .-1 
               .-1              ~a,.-tll'+41+ ... +a..+~a..+a . 
                                .tf:t                              f:t 
          7.  Show that  if til + 41 + 41 + ...  is a convergent eeriea of real numbers and 
              "1, lit ........  is a subeequence of the IJ8qU8DCe  1.2. 3 •.•••  then 
              (til  + 41 + ... + a..) + <a..+, + ... + a.,)  + <tJ.,+1 + ... + o.j  + ... 
                                                                                          -~a,.. 
          8.  Let tIJ, 41. 41, . .. be a decreasing sequence of poeitive numbers. Show that 
               <a)  if tI,  + 41 + 4J + ... converges then lim ftG,.  - 0 
                                                           -
               (b)  til + 41 + 41 + ...  converges if and cmIy if  tIJ + .. + 4aa + 8aa + ... 
                   converges. 
           9.  (InteRral teat).  Let J: 1% E  R : % ~ 11 .... R  be a decreuing  poeitive-va1ued 
               function. Prove that  ~ !(,,)  converges if and  only if lim /'·1(;1) •       .... 
                                       i=t                                   ..... 
               (Hint:  Draw a diagram.) 
          10.  Use the prececiinl problem to tell for which ,  > 0 the following __ COIl-
               verge: 
                            t ~.  t "(~ ,,).'  ~" loc" (~loc a)" 
          11.  Show the convergence of the aerieI 
                                               tG-,.~a) 
               of real-valued functions on R - 1-1. -2, -3, ... J. 
          12.  Show that  if til + 41 + lit + ...  is  an  abeolutely converpnt  aiea  of  real 
               numbers, then tI,1 + G/' + G/' + ...  converges. 
            13.  (Root  teat). Let t .. he a __ of real numbers. Show that if there exiata a 
                              II < 1 IUch that ~ S II for all aufticiently large ft, then the aeries 
                  number 
                  is abeolutely eoDVerpnt. 
            14.  Prove that  a aeries of real  numbenwhich  is eoDverpDt but not abeolutely 
                  OODverpDt caD have ita terms rearruaed in IUch a way that  the DeW IIfIriu 
                  008 .... to &DJ pree .........  DWIlber,  01' IWIh that  the partial IUme of 
                  the Dew eeries become arbitrarily  Iaip,  or become arbitrarily  ..n. 
            tL  Prove that if t;t .. &Del t:; "" are ablolutely converpat  eerill  of ... numbera 
                   then the aeries ~ a.P. is &leo abeolutely Converpot, and 
                                        ...... 
                                                ~aA-(~ .. )(~""} 
             16.  Let CIa, Ga, Gi,  •••  be a aequence of nonnegative'"  numbers, let 8" Bt, Bt, •.. 
                   be •  II8qUeDC8  (finite or iuDite)  of disjoint nonempty eeta of natural numbers 
                   wboee union is (1,2,  3, ..• 1, and auppoee that for each i auch that 8. is infinite 
                   the  __ ~ .. eoDYeI'III and that if the number of eeta 8" Bt, Sa, ... is 
                                  .:1'1, 
                  :m: the aeriee ~ (~, .. )  converps. Prove that  the eerill  1;; .. 
             17.  !At V be. complete normed vector space (Prob. 22, Chap. III).  The defiDi-
                   tioaII of an iDfiDite eeries of  real  numben &Del the  converpnce and IWD  of 
                   IW!h a eerieI .......  hmnecl.tely to eeries of elementa of V. 
                   (a)  Verify the ......  for  __ of element. of  V  of  the  OO8verpl108  cri-
                         terioD of the &rat propoIltion of 12. 
                   (b)  De8De the  aotloa of ablolute eoDverpIlCI8 for __ of element. of  V 
                         &Del verify the rearr&DIin& and fIII'OUpbac propertill of . abIolutely con-
                         .,...t eerieI of ...... t. of V. 
                   (0)   Define the notion of uniform OO8verpDCe  for a __ of V-valued fUG-
                         tioaII on a metric apace aDd prove that the IUID of a uniformly COOV8l'pDt 
                         aeries of COOtinuOUl V-valued funotioall ia oontinuouL 
             18.  Let  e., C"  Ct,  •••  E R.  Prove that  if  lim IC.!c..tll exiata, it  il  equal to  the 
                                                                         .-
                   radius of convergence of the pOwer eeries ~ c. zw. 
             19.  !At Ce, Cit Ct, •••  E  R. Prove that the radius of converpnce of the power eeriea 
                   ~ c. ZW  is  l/1im aup ~. (Cf. Prob. 18, Chap.  III  for the definition of 
                   ~  .  ... 
                   11m IUPi the quoted  expn!IIIlon ia to be interpreted  .. 0 if  the  lim sup does 
                   aot exiat &Del u  •  if the tim IUp ia 0.) 
             ...  I'iDcl th. radli of converpnce of the lollowiq power .11: 
                    <a>  ~.00I.)" 
                                                                                          ..,8L111U1     161 
                (b)  ~ (loa ,,) ... - Z" 
                (c)  ~ ,,-z;. 
                (d)~~ 
                      ~ (v'A)-
                (e)  ~~. 
                      ~ "I 
           21.  Show  that  a  power  aeriea ~ c" Z" baa  the  .. me radiua of  CODVerpnce .. 
                ~ c.... Z", for any poeitive integer m. 
           22.  Let a, Ct, Cl, Ct, •••  E  R, with at leaat ODe of Ct, C1, Ct, •• ,  Donaero, and let the 
                power aeriee ~ c,,(z - a)·  have  poaitive  radius of convergence r. Show that 
                 there  exists a poeitive number  1 < r BUch that the BUm of the aeriea is nonaero 
                 for ever,y real number  z BUch that 0 < F - a I < I. 
           23.  Let a, Ct, Cl, Ct, •••  E R and  let the power aeries ~ c,,(z - a)- have  radius of 
                 convergeDce r ~ 0 and converge to fez) if Iz - at  < r. Show that if 6 ER and 
                 I" - at  < r,  then  there  exists a  power  aeries in  powers  of z - b which COD-
                 vergesto/(z)  whenever lz-hI <r -I" - at. 
                 (Hint: Expand out ~ c" «z - b) + (6 - a»- ~y the binomial theorem.) 
           24.  Let a E R, a" 0, I, 2, .... Show that the "binomial  aeries" 
                               1 +  + a(a - 1) ~ + aea - l)(a - 2) zI + 
                                     lIZ       21                    31                ... 
                 baa radiua of convergence 1. Let f (z) be the BUm of this aeriee on ita interval  of 
                 CODverpilce. Show that  (1 + z) r(z)  - qf(z),  and  hence that fez)  - (1 + z)· 
                 for  Iz\  < 1. 
           26.  Show that. the aeries  ~ (  ;            ) I is abeolute1~ convergent  and lind ita BUm • 
                                          .... -1  n   m 
            26.  u. Problem 15 and the binomial theorem to show that 
                                           ~ Z") (~t:) _ ~ (z + y)" 
                                         (
                                           f:t nl     f:t ,,'      f:t     "I 
                 for  &ll z, II E  R.  Hence  give an  alternate  development  of the  theory  of  the 
                 exponential  function ... 
            '11.  Find  a  real-valued  funotion  on  R  poeeeeaing denvativea  of &ll orders  whOle 
                 Taylor  aeriee at a certain  point  converges to the function  only at that  point. 
                  (Hint:  Start  with Prob.  26, Chap.  VI.) 
            28.  Define the  functions  tan, cot,  1IeC,  C8C in  terms  of sin and COB and  compute 
                 their derivativea. 
                         166                '9'11.  DfTBBCIIANOB OJ' LDI1T OPIIJU.TlONI 
                         29.  Show that the functions aln and  tan  (el.  Prob. 28) are  each increuing  on 
                                                                                                                                                                                I 
                                       (-r/2.  r/2).  Hence define t.he funcUons aln- and tan-I  (on (-1.1)  and R 
                                      reepectively). prove them differentiable. and compute their derifttivee. 
                         30.  8Wting  with the formula for d tan-I s/u  (el.  Prob. 29). live  the TeUODIJ 
                                       justifying the argument thaUor  Izl < 1 we have 
                                                                            t ",                                 t                                                                                               zI             zI                   . 
                                             tan-Is-                            ol+P·  • (1-P+14- ... )",-z-3"+6"- .... 
                                       and therefore  .                                                      r                         111 
                                                                                                            i- I -3+&-7+  .. ·• 
                         81.  8tartiDc with the formula for d ain-lz/u  (el. Prob. 29). mab UIJ8 of the bi-
                                       nomiall8riea (el. Prob. 24) to find the Taylor aeries for aIn-1 at the pobat O. 
                          82.  The defbdtioDIJ of an infinite aeries of real  numbel'll and the oonverpn08 and 
                                       111m of IUch a eeri. extend verbatim to aeries of complex numbers (el. Prob. 
                                       20.  Qaap.  III).  Verify  that  the converpnce  criterion  of the &ra propoeition 
                                       of 12. the notion of abeolute oonverpDce. and the I'eU'I'aDIiDI and rearoup-
                                        iDs propertiee  of abeolutel7 OODverpDt lUi. hold for aeriee of complex DUm-
                                       ben, and that the notion of uniform OODverpllC8 extends to aeries of complex-
                                        valued funotiODlJ on a metric apace ... well .. the theorem that the 111m of a 
                                        uniformly OODvergent lUies of continuous functioDIJ is continuous. (1bere  is 
                                        no need to prove any of this if you have done Problem 17.) The notion of real 
                                        power lUi. extends to power lUi. with complex coefticienu in powen of a 
                                        complex variable. Verify  that the fim theorem of 13 paeraliaI  abnoet ver-
                                        batim to lOch complex power lUi •. 
                          33.  (a)  Verify  that the complex power aeri. 
                                                                                                                                . ".  .. 
                                                                                                                  1 +ii+2j+3j+'" 
                                                                                                                                 ".             ,.              ". 
                                                                                                                  1-2j+ij-6j+'" 
                                                                                                                                ..              .. 
                                                                                                                   '-3j+5i- ... 
                                                      eonverp for all. e C (el. Prob. 32). 
                                         (b)  Denot.ing t.he IOma of the earl.  of part (a) by ... 001 •• and lin. reepeo-
                                                      tively  (which agrees with our previowl conventionl  if • e R). prove that 
                                                                                                                                ,...e'I-....... 
                                                      for all '1. It e C (el. Prob. 26) and that 
                                                      for all. e c-                                                      "'-OOI.+ialn. 
                                         (c)  Verify that                                                                                             e'-+ ..... 
                                                                                                                               001'---2-
                                                                                                                                 .... -..... 
                                                                                                                               am .---w-
                                                                                                                                                                l   • 
                                                                                                                               00"'+ aln                                 -      1 
                                                      for all  • e c. and  that  the  uaua1 equations hold for  001 ('1 +..,  and 
                                                      aIn( .. + ..,. 
                                                                                  no ......     161 
              (d)  Prove that  any complex number ... 0 CloD be writtea  • - II lor lOIII8 
                   tEC. 
              (e)  Prove that for any • E C and any positive int.epr  •  we ClaD write • - "" 
                   for lIOme III E C. 
         34.  The "fundamental theorem 01 aIpbra"  atatel that for ..., poll,,"  in ...... 
              and any Gh III, ... , a. E C there exieta at -- ODe r e C ... thM 
                                  t"+G,r-'+IIIr-'+           ... +a.-o. 
              Expand the following outline ·into a proof 01 dUe theorem. 
               (a)  Let I: C ..... C  be defined by 1(.)  _ .. + .,-' + ... + Ga. ".. 1/(1)' 
                   is larae if !.! is larae (el. Prob. 20, Chap.  lIn. 
               (b)  Since the function !/(') I is continuoua (el. Prob. 11, a.ap.IV),lt  &bete-
                    fore attaiDla  minimum at lOIII8 point r e c. 
               (c)  We can write 
                                1(.)  -/er> + G(. - t)-(1 + (. - ",(.» 
                    where m is a positive intepr,  a e c, a .. 0, and ,(.)  iI • poIyDomial in .. 
               (d)  ChooIe II e C  IIIch  that  ttl" -  -/er>/a  (el.  Problem 88(e».  ".. If 
                    I(t) .. 0 we have lJet + lei), < 'let)' for ..., eufticieIltl)-.....u poIlttft 
                    real number I, which iI·a contradictioD. Thus/(t)  - 0. 
          35.  Let (II, b) and  (e, dl be cloeed intervals  in ft  and  let I be a  continuous ..... 
               valued function on  I (z,,)  E liJI: z E (G, bl., e (C, dll. By Prob. 15, Chap. 
               VI,  /"/(z.,)IIz  i. continuous in ,  and L'/(z,,)dr  II continuous in ., 10 thM 
                            f."(f: I(z, ,).)dr and  £(1." I(z,,)dr). 
               exiIt. Prove that theee intecrale are equal by computiq  1./. 01 
                            J:(f: /(z, ,).)dr and  /"(!." l(z,,)fIr)-
               for I E (II, b). 
          36.  Let J be  a  reaI·valued function 08  .. open 111_'  01  P.  Proft  thM if 
               :z (*D and  ~ (i!) emt and are continuous then tbey are equal.  ('/" 
               hu been defined in the text; the definition 01 8/a. iI ......... ). (HWtI: u. 
               Problem 35 to ahow that  if the .. I (z, ,) e .. : z e (a, "I •• e Ie, eIIl II ell-
               tirely contained in the let 08 which I is defined, theft 
                            £(/.' :z(~)dr)'" - £(1.' :'(~"Ir)-.) 
          37.  Let II, b, e E ft, b < c, and let I be. continuous ..... n.Iued fuaotiaD OIl the .. 
                «z, ,) E liJI : z ~ a, ,  E [6, eJl. Let F: 16, el......  be  ......  fuDo&ioD. W. 
               -y that  I.+-/(z, ,) ". ...."..  tmif"",."  10 F(r) .. [6, el If, for ..... > 0, 
                there exietll a  number N e R IIIch  that  I f: I(z, ,) _  - 1'61) I <. lor II 
                , > N  and  all  ,  E (6, el  (10  that  for  each ,  E (6, c)  the  Improper iD.tepU 
                /'+-/(z, ,). emte and equala FM (el. Prob. 28, Chap. VI».  Pnm thM if 
                L+-/(z, !f)dz convergea uniformly to FM on [6, eJ. thea II' iI 00Idima0ue. 
            ..  We IJft'lIIICIIIAI  01' LDIn' ""'1'10.8 
                   if.,.,c>O. 
            at.  Par" - 0, 1, I, ..... 1_ - /.." lin- a c. SIIow that 
                         "                                  , 
                  . (a)  •   (eoa • lID-I .) - (" - 1) aiD .... a - " .- :I: 
                                .-1 
                   (b)  1_ --.--1 ....  ih~2 
                                  l·a·6 .. · (2!-l)"} 
                   (e)  I .. -      I. 4 .....  (Ja)           J            . 
                                      2· 4· ....  (!!)                  lor" - 1,2, a, ... 
                         ''''''1 - a • 6 • 1  ...  (ta + 1) 
                   (d)  1 .. 1.,1 .....  is a clecreuiDc eequenee havilll the limit I0IO IoIld 
                                                            lim I,"*' _ I 
                                                            - .. 
                   (e)  lim         t • t • 4 ..........  (211) • (Ia)                   _  !      w:      ' 
                         -1 • a • a • 6 • 6 • 7 ... (ta - 1) • (ta + 1)                      :I  (    &I1ia  product). 
             .. (a)  Show &11M if I: ,. e a : _ ~ 11- a ill oontiauoua, then 
                                   t/(l')  - /:*1 (.,. + t (J(t') - £+1 (.,.). 
                                                        /                                   /
                   (b)  Show that. if , > 1 thea loi' - {.+lq. C  Men from - 1!2& by _ 
                         than  1/.... (HiN:  Work out  the iIltepoal uaia& the  T.,tOr  __ for 
                         10& (l + -) at the point 0.) 
                   (0)  U. pan (a) wWtl - ... put (b), aDd PIob.I2, Qaap. VI to prove that 
                         .....                 ~00I.1- (.+1> Ioi"+.) 
                    (d)  u.. pan (8) af the ........  problem to aomput.e the above limit, t.hua 
                         obWaiDI 
                                         lim         "~ - I  (8tirliDl'8 formula). 
                                         -    ... r-
             41.  I'ar  _ e a,  ..  .,(.) - miD I I_ - .il : , - 0, ~I, ~2, ... J (which  is  the 
                   diItuae rna • to the ..... iDtepr). Show that 
                    (a)  ... ill a eoatiaUOUll ,UDOtioa I: a - a liven by 
                                                      lea) - ~ tp(ICh)/I'" 
                    (b)  if ......  ,  are _          DUlDben which have deoimaI expaDIIioDi which are 
                          equal.....,t  iD tbeir ,. deeimaI P ......  '01' ... , > 0, &heir ,. ~ 
                          ..... by 1 ..........  ~ fl'OlB the pair If. 61, then 
                                                       N) - .-(a) - ~IO'"' 
           (0)  it. uad , .... ia (b) ..... ill .. of ....... 0.1 ••..• i-I tbaD 
                                      .,(10-,)  -  f'<lO":I) -*10"""'. 
                wbDe it • ~ , .. .,(1",,)  - .,(10-.) 
           (d)  it.ud' .... 1n (b),taa. 
                                        1<') -lfII)  - ~ .Ut·" 
                ., tW C/CJ) -I(;II»/CJ - .) .. III ...... odd or eYeD aoooaIiDI .. i Ie 
                odclor....                                         . 
           (.)  .... _  ..... fUDlllloa/: a .... a .. DOWhtre cWfereDt.iabIe. 
         CHAPTER  VIII 
         The Method of Successi"e 
         Approximations 
                                     In thia  chapter  a  number  of important  exiItence 
                                theorems are  proved by  a  IUccellive approximation 
                                method.  By way of introduction  to IUCCleIIive approxi-
                                matioDl, consider Newton',  method of IIOlvilll an equt.-
                                tion/(s)  - 0: Suppoee that/. a continuous nal-valued 
                                function  on an open interval  U in R and that I attains 
                                the value RIO at lOme point of U. We wiab to find thiI 
                                point.  Allume that I. differentiable on U and that I' 
                                •  continuous  and nowhere RIO on U (10 that I hu the 
                                value 181'0 at only one point of U). Let s. E U be IOID8 
                                lint  app~ilnation to  the  root  of I(s) - O.  Then 
                                I(s. + A) - 0,  for  lOme mnaIl A.  Since I(s. + A)  ia 
                                "approximately"  1(:zI) + A/'(:zI), by -tina  the latter 
                                expl'ellion  equal  to  RIO  we have  A "approadmatelT' 
                                 -/(z.)II'(z.).   Hence  we let the nen appawimpoo 
                                to  the  root  of  I(s) - 0  to  be  SI -    s. -/(~/I'~. 
                                (Geometrically,  SI  •  the point  of interaection of the 
                                :z-axis with the tanpnt to the curve,  -/(s) at tbepoint 
                                 (s.,/(:zI».) If SI E  U we can try to pta betW..,.,..... 
                                 mation  to  the  root  by  I18ttiq  ~ - Sa -/(~/I'(~. 
                                If St E U we can similarly  define :z.. '1'b.ua, ptOYided 
                                 we never  l.ve  the interval  U, we &at a  IeqUeDGI  of 
                                 pointe St, Sl, St,  •••  of U such  that 
                                          Sto+l - S. -~, .. - 0, 1,1, ~ ••• 
                                 If thia  BeqUIIlC8  CODverpi  to a poiat feU, .. by 
                                 continuity  we haye 
                                                       f- f --Afr, 
                                 80 that I(E) - 0 and f is our deeired root. It.,.. witJl.. 
                                 out saying that  tbia pmcedure  doeI -* ..,. work. 
                                 8everaI poabilitiee are iDultnted  in the fipte  _  &be 
                                 next pap and only in cue <a> do we arrive at • root. 
           1.  ftD •• ~ ~"'ON. 
                   (a)                               (b) 
                                                               11. THE FIXED POINT THEOUM. 
                  Tbe followiaa theorem I&1B that a certain rather pneral  problem can 
           &I ... be IOlved by _                   of the moat aimple-minded kind of auccaive 
           appruimatioa.  In the remainder of tbia chap_ and in the neD chapter we 
           ......  _    how tWa.., rault can be applied to a variety of apecial probl8llll 
           01 CIOIIIlcI.able moment. 
            n........ 1M II ......... ", .. ".,. tMIrio IJICICC, F: E - E • fuM-
           "'"'" .",...  .... __ • ,.., tlt,,,,,-l  ,. "'- ~ .- IItGt lor aU 
           p,IEB .. ,.. 
                                             tl(F(P), F(f»  S W(p, f). 
            2'_ ........  wituf poW P E B .- IItGt F(P) - P. FurlAermore if 
            PI it ., poW 01 E ." "  - F(pe), PI - F(p.),  PI - F(pd, •. , a..n 
                                                         lim,.  - P. 
                                                        -
                  If we apply the given inequality to dittinct  points p, I of E we &at 
            l  ~ O. If B doeI not contain dittinct  points, tbat it if E conaiata of a linsl-
            point, the inequality  holda for l  - O. Thus we may IUIIUIJl8  it given that 
            OSl<l. 
                  Let •  .tan with the lilt part of the theorem, letting,.  be an arbitrary 
            point 01 II and lettinc  Pl, PIt PI, • .•  be given by 
                                         ,.., - I'(p.),        ,,- 0, I, 2, .•.• 
            J'GI' lIlT Intepr  "  > 0 we haft 
                               4(,.,,..a)  - tl('(p...a),  ,(p.»            S W(p...., P.)· 
                                                                                                      ,1. rJUI).eII...,  THO...                        111 
               Repeated  application  of this gives 
                                                                                                                a 
                     d(p,., P"+1) ~ k d(P,,_I, P.)  ~ k' d(P"_,, P._I)  ~ k d(p.-a, P __ t) ~ •.. 
               80 that 
                                                              d(p", P"H)  ~ k"d(Po, PU. 
               It follows that for any  integers n > m > 0 we have 
                              d(p.,  P.)  ~ d(p.,  P .. H) + d(P_H'  P .. +2) + ... + d(P,,_I, p,,) 
                                                 ~ k" d(po, PI) + k-+1 d(po, PI) + ... + k,,-I d(po, PU 
                                                 ~ d(po, Pl)(k- + k-+1 + k .. +t + ... ) 
                                                      d(Po, PI)k" 
                                                 -         1 -k  ' 
               the  last  step  using  the  equation  for the  sum  of a  geometric  series. Since 
               lim k" - 0,  the  sequence  Po, Pl, PI, . ..  is a  Cauchy  sequence.  E  is com-
               -
               plete, 80 this sequence converges to a limit, lI&y P. That is 
                                                                             P ... limp •. 
                                                                                      " ..... 
                The  inequality  d(F(p),  F(q»  ~ d(p, q)  shows  that  F  is  uniformly  con-
                tinuous,  hence continuous.  Thus                                                        . 
                                                       F(P)  - lim F(p,.)  - lim p.+1 =  P. 
                                                                       ....                    . .... 
                To show that P is the only point with the property  that F(P)  - P, auppose 
                that Q E  E,  F(Q) - Q.  Then 
                                                  d(P, Q) - d(F(P),  F(Q»  ~ 1cd(P, Q). 
                Since II; < 1 thia implies that d(P, Q) ... 0, 80 that  P  ... Q. 
                         A map F of a metric space E into itself is called a contraction map if 
                there  exists  a  real  number  A:  < 1 auch  that  d(F(p),  F(q»  ~ 1cd(p, q)  for 
                all p, q E  E. A pea point for I" is a point  PEE such that Jt'(P) - P. The 
                theorem  11&18, in  brief,  that  a  contraction  map  of a  nonempty  complete 
                metric  space  baa a  fixed point.  The  theorem  also aasertB that  this  fixed 
                point  is unique  and  it gives a simple auee_ve  approximation  procedure 
                for finding the fixed point.  If we check the details  of the proof we see that 
                 we can even estimate  the accuracy of any approximation  of the fixed point, 
                for one direct  consequence of the inequality 
                                                                  d(p  P) <  d(Po, pI)k-
                                                                        .,,,-                 1-k 
                                                                  d( ... -    P) <  d(po, p.)k-
                                                                       .... ,       -          I-A: 
         171    mt.  8t7001188l\'11 APPJIOXlIUTlONI 
         Thus for any Po E E we have 
                                       dCPo, P) S d~, !:<t}) . 
         Proptnltlora.     Let a, b E R, a < b, aM let F: (a, b) -     (a, b) be a  continu-
         OUI/Ufldion. 8u'PfHI3e that F ia differentiable on (a, b)  aM that there ~ 
         a real number k < 1 auch tha'  I F'(x) I S k lor all :a: E (a, b).  T1aen F ia a 
         contrtJdion map, 3D  that the jiud  poim  theorem ia afYPlU:able to (a, b) aM F. 
              The proof of this (,,onsists in showing that for all 1', q E  (a, b) we have 
          IF(p)  - F(9)1 Skip - ql.  This  is  clear  if l' - q,  whereas if 1''' q  the 
         mean value  theorem gives us the  existence of some E between l' and  q 
         such  that 
                                   F(P)  - F(q)  ... F'm(p  - q), 
         so that 
                           IF(p)  - F(q) I == IF'mllp - ql skip - ql. 
                  PI p,   p.                 P.     PI  p,                 p.     P. PI 
                   <a>                            (b)                            (e) 
          FlG111UD 32. The  fixed point  theorem for contraction  mape of a c10111!d interval  in R. 
                      In each diagram the curved line ia the graph of the function. 
               The important point about the proposition is that it provides a epecific 
          procedure for finding the  point  P E (a, b) such that  F(P)  - P, not  that 
          it tens us that  such a P exists. The mere existence of a fixed point P for 
          any continuous map F: [a, b) -      (a, bJ can be deduced from the intermediate 
          value  theorem  by  noting  that  the  real-valued function  on  (a, b)  whose 
          value at any x is F(x)  - x is continuous, nonnegative at a, and nonpoeitive 
          at b, so that  it equals zero somewhere on (a, b). 
               The proposition can be used to solve equations of the form I(x)  .... o. 
                                                                               ,2.  IMPLICIT  rvMCI'ION8       171 
           Suppose in fact that a, b E R, a < b, and that I: [a, b] -                      R is a continuous 
           function  that  changes sign on [a, b]. Suppose further  that / is differentiable 
           on  (a, b)  and  that  there  exist  Kl, K, E R  such  that  0 < Kl S f'(x)  S K. 
           for all x E (a, b). (Thus I is an increasing function  on [a, b]j changing /  to 
            -I would enable us to handle decreasing functions  that  happen  to _tiefy 
           analogous conditions.)  Then  we can show that  the proposition,  and hence 
           the  fixed point  theorem,  are  applicable  to  [a,b] and  the  function  F(z)  -
           x - cl(x),  where c is any constant  such that 0 < c S 11K •. To do this note 
           first  that  F is continuous  and  that  for any  x E (a, b) the number  F'(x)  -
           1 - cJ'(x)  is at least  1 - cK.  and  at  most  1 - cKI,  hence is nonnegative 
           and less than  some number  less than  one. In particular  F is an increaainl 
           function.  Since  I  also  increases  on  [a, b], I(a)  < 0 < I(b)  and  for  any 
           x E [a, b] 
                          a  < a - cf(a)  = F(a)  S F(x)  S F(b)  == b - c/(b)  < b, 
           so that  F actually  maps [a, b} into itself. Thus the conditione of the proposi-
            tion are indeed satisfied. The fixed point  E E [a, b] is such that E - F(E)  -
           E - cf(E),  that is fm ... 0, as desired. We remark  finally that  if we chooee 
           c =  1I/,(Xo)  for some fixed Xo E  [a, b], set  F(z)  .. x - c/(x),  and  then  try 
            to define Xl,  X"  X"~ •••  by  the  recursion  relation  XnH  -              F(x .. )  for n  -  0, 1, 
            2, ... , we obtain  a well-known simplification  of Newton's  method  which, 
            however, does not always work. 
                                                                         ,2.  THE SIMPLEST CASE OF 
                                                          THE IMPLICIT FUNCI'ION THEOREM. 
                  It often  happens  that  for a given function I of two real variables  we 
            want  to solve the  equation  I(x,  1/) = 0 for 11  in tenns  of z.  That  ie, for a 
            given real-valued function I on a subset of E' we want to find a real-valued 
            function  I(J on a subset  of R such that for all X  in the latter  subset  we have 
            I(x,  l(J(x» ==  o. The problem as thus  posed  is unwieldy.  Among other  diffi-
            culties, for a given real value of X there may not exist any II E R such that 
            f(x,  1/)  = 0, or there  may exist many such numbers  II, the number of them 
            possibly depending on x. Even if there  exists such a function  fP(x) there  is 
            no reason to expect that  it can be given "explicitly,"  that  is by means of 
            some sort  of formula,  so  that  actually  "solving"  for  11  in  tenna of x, or 
            "finding"  I(J, is literally  Ollt of the question.  The most that  we can hope to 
            do, and this would be of IIOme moment, is to show that under certain general 
            conditions there exists somI' function I(J so.tisfying the equation/ex,  fP(z» - 0 
            and  possessing other  desirable  qualities,  such  as  being defined on a fairly 
            large subset of R, being c,,"tinuoU8, or heing unique. To be somewhat more 
            specific as  well as  more Vl'Ilctical, we refonnulate  our  problem  88 follows: 
            We assume  that  a  renl-nlued  fUlletion f  is defined and  continuous  on a 
            given open subset of E'!. and we ask whether  there exists a continuous reaI-
         valued  function  f{J on lOme nonempty  open subset  of R such  that for all  % 
         in the latter  subset  the  point  (.1:, f{J(%» lies in the given  open subset  of gt 
         and 1(%, f{J(%» - O. These conditions  are not enough to 888ure the existence 
         of 
            a BOlution; for example if I is always positive then f{J(%) cannot  be defined 
         for  any  % E R.  We  therefore  suppose  we are  given  a  point  (a, h)  in  the 
         given open subeet of gt such that I(a, h) =- 0 and we insist that the function 
         f{Jbe defined  on lOme open  interval  containing  a and  that  f{J(a) - h. But 
         even this is not enough. For example, if 1(%, ,) - z.I + " and (a, h) - (O, 0) 
         then f{J cannot  be defined  for any  real number  % ,. O. The  trouble  in  this 
         lut aample eeema to be that for any given .1: near a the function I has an 
         extreme value  at ,  - h. Thua  we need lOme condition  guaranteeing  that 
         for any given .1: near a the function I actually  goes both  up and down  as , 
         varies  near  h, and  the  obvious  way  to  do  this  is  to  suppose  that  aI/a, 
         exists  near  (a, h) and is continuoua  and different  from zero. A. a matter  of 
         fact  this  condition  is sufficient  for  the  solvability  of  our  problem,  as  the 
         following implicit  function  theorem  shoWi. 
          na ..... m.  1M I be G continuoua r«&l-vaIUtd/unction on an open ..."., 01 /.4.'1 
          IAGt contoiftl 1M point (a, h), with I(a, h) - O. 8uppoae IJuJt aI/a, eNta and 
          ia eontiftUOUl on 1M ,_ open aublet and IJuJt lL (a, h) ,. O.  TAeft there 
                                                                 a, 
          esiIC open iaImIala  U, VCR, with a E U and bE V, aucI& that there uiIt. 
          a unique ftmclion f{J: U -  V aucI& that 1(%, 1/1(%» .. 0 lor all % E U, and aucI& 
          IAGt thia It.mClion f{J ia continuow. 
               We begin  by  defining  another  real-valued  function  F  on  the  same 
          open IUblet  of EI on which I is defined by 
                                     F(%, ,) _  ,_  !]%, 11) 
                                                       ,,(a, h) 
          Thi. F has .. baaic properties  that F and aF lay are continuoua,  F(a, h) - b, 
           aF  (a, b) - 0, and  for  any  (%, ,)  the  equation  1(.1:, y)  .. 0  holds  if  and 
           a, 
          only if F(.1:, ,) - ,. The laat  property  indicates  the main  idea of the proof, 
          which  is a  judicious  application  of the  fixed point  theorem.  For  this,  we 
          chooee lOme r > 0 luch that the open ball in JJ:I of center  (a, b) and radius, 
          is entirely  contained  in the open  set on which I is defined.  Since aF / By is 
          continuoua  and  aF (a, b) - 0  we  may  auume  ,  taken  so  small  that 
                               By 
           laF/a,1 < 1/2 at each  point  of  the  ball.  Choose  k such  that  0 < k <', 
          then chooee "  such  that  0 < h < V,I - kt and  such  that  I F(.1:, h) :,:. hi 
           < k/2  whenever  Is - al < h,  this  last  demand  being  justifiable  by  the 
           continuity  of F. We .hall  prove  the theorem  with  U = (0 - h, II + IL)  and 
                                                                                 ,2.  IIU'LICliT  l'UlIaftON8      175 
           v '""  (b -    k, h + k).  Conaider any  fixed ~ E  U.  For any  11 E  R 8uch that 
            1 y -  b 1 ~ k we have 
                       d«~, 11), (a, h») =  V(~ - a)t + (y - W < V ht + kt <', 
           80  that  (~, y)  is in our open  ball of radiU8 r.  If also 1/' E  R,  Iy' - bl ~ k, 
           then  by the mean value theorem  we have 
                                    F(~, 11)  -    F(~, 11') _  aF  (~, y")(y  - y') 
                                                                    8y 
           for lOme y" between  11  and  11'  (or, if y ... y',  for 11"  -                  y - 11'). The  point 
            (~, 11") is also in our ball of radiU8 "  80 we deduce 
                                          IF(~, y) - F(~, y')1 ~ ~ Iy - y'l· 
                               IF(~, y)  - hi ~ IF(~, 11)  -          F(~, b) I + IF(~, b) - bl 
                                                       1 II1      bl      k       k       k 
                                                   <"2 -. +"2 ~"2+"2-k. 
            Thus  the  fixed point  theorem  is applicable  to  the  cloeed interval  [b - k, 
            b + k] and  the  function  that  senda  each  y  into  F{z,1/), a  function  that 
            mapa  this interval  into  itself.  (Recall  that  z  i8  fixed.)  This  gives  us  the 
            existence  of  a  unique  11  8uch  that  10 - bl ~ k and  F(~, 11) =  ,1,  that  is 
            I (z, 11)  .... O. Notice that in fact  111  - b I < k by the last displayed inequality  i 
            that is, 11 E V. Since this  is valid for each ~ E U our desired  function  tp is 
            defined  by tp{z) .. 11  and  to complete  the  proof of the  theorem  it remains 
            only  to prove  that  tp is continuous.  But  the continuity  of tp can easily be 
            deduced  from what  has been proved  already.  Note  first  that  allay  is not 
            zero at any  point  of the  open  ball  with  center  (a, b)  and  radius  r,  since 
             laF/BtlI  < 1/2  there.  To  prove  tp  continuoU8 at  lOme a' E  U,  for  any 
            • > 0 consider the lI&Jlle problem  as in the 8tatement  of the theorem,  with 
             (G, b)  replaced  by  (G', b'),  where  b' -           tp(a'),  and I  replaced  by ita  restric-
            tion  to the open 8ubset of Et given by 
                                    ({z, y) E Et: z E U, y E V, Iy - b'l < el. 
            The  procedure  used to  obtain  U, V, tp  gives  us,  analogously,  U', V', tp', 
             the  latter  being a  function  tp': U' -             V'  8uch  that  I(z,  tp'{z»  - 0  for  all 
             z E U'. (In the present  context  the  prime'  does not indicate  differentia-
             tion.)  But we are dealing  here with  the  restriction  of I to a smaller  open 
             subset  of Et than  given  originally,  80  that  U' C  U,  V' C  V, and  so that 
             11/ - b'l < e for  all  y E  V'.  The  uniqueness  property  of  tp  implies  that 
             tp'{z)  ... tp{z)  for  all  ~ E  U',  80  that  Itp(z)  -            tp(a') 1 < f  for  all  z E  U'. 
             Thus  1 tp{z)  -     tp(a') 1 < e whenever z is in lOme open ball in R of center G'. 
             Hence tp is continuous  at a'. Since a' was an arbitrary  point of U, the func-
             tion  tp is continuoU8. 
         IT6    VIR.  8trCCU8lVII  APPROXlIlA110N8 
          Corollary  (lnHrseJunetion           theorem),      Let, be a real-wlued Junction 
         on an open BUbBet 01 R Uw.t contains the point  b mad 1UPfI086 Uw.t rI ezim and 
         is continuoua on thia open IUbset, with ,'(b)  #- O.  Then tMre e:Nt open inter-
         vals U, V in R, with bE V, lUCk Uw.t ,  is defined at 6IJCh point 01 V and the 
         reatriction 01 ,  to  V  is a one-one mtlp 01 V  onto U tDhoae inverN function 
         ,,-1: U _  V  is di$erentitJble. 
               On the open subset of l!JI consisting of all (z, II) E l!JI such that  II is 
          in the  open subset  of R  on which g is defined. we define a function 1 by 
         l(z,lI)  -  z - g(II). Set a =:  g(b). We may apply the theorem to this 1 and 
          the  point  (a, b)  to  obtain  open  intervals  UI,  VI C R,  with  a E  UI  and 
          bE VI,  and  a  unique  and  continuous  funetion  '1': UI -           VI  lIuch  that 
          z - g(rp(z»  for all z E UI.  The  map 'I' is one-one from UI onto rp(Ua) -
          ,,-·(U.)  ("\ V ••  By the first proposition of Chapter  IV the set ,,-·(Ua)  is an 
          open lIubeet of the set on which g ill defined, hence an open IIUbset of R. 
          Therefore  rp(Ua) ... ,,-I(U ) ("\ VI  ill  an  open  subset  of  R.  rp(U )  is  also 
                                        I                                              I
          co}lnected, since it is a continuous image of a connected set. A. a nonempty 
          connected open IIUbtlet of an open interval  in R,  rp(UI)  ill itself an  open 
          interval  (in fact  it ill the  open interval  (g.l.b. rp(Ua),l.u.b. rp(UI»)'  If we 
          set  U  -  UI,  V - rp(U.),  then  the  restriction  of g to  V ill a one-one map 
          onto  U whose inverse map is 'I' and  the whole of the corollary ill proved 
          except for the differentiability of'll. [It is only fair to remark that there are 
          much more elementary  proofs. For example, g' maintaina  the same sign 
          on some open interval  in R that  containll b, so that we can assume that g 
          is either IItrictly increasing or strictly  decreasing. We can also assume that 
          g is bounded. Using the intermediate  value theorem we deduce that  g is 
          one-one from any open subinterval  of the open set on which it is defined 
          onto an open interval in R. This enables us to define the inverae function 
          ,,-.  and to prove that ,,-1 is continuous.] To prove'll differentiable we may 
          suppose V chosen 110 that g'(II)  pili 0 if II E Vi indeed this is true for the  V 
           we have conlltructed, and we could in any case guarantee this by replacing 
           U and V by suitable open subintervals. Then for z, XI E U, X '" Zl, we have 
                        X  -  ZI = g(rp(z»  - g(rp(xa»  = (rp(x)  - rp(za) )g'(8), 
           for some 9 between rp(x) and rp(ZI). Since 9 E  V we have rI(8) ,,0 and we 
           may write 
                                         rp(z) - rp(ZI)        1 
                                             x - Zl       = g'(9)  . 
           Since'll  is continuous  we have lim 9 = rp(x.), 110 since g' is continuous we 
                                                .... , 
           have lim g'(8)  = ,'(rp(XI».  Hence 
                 ·"·1 
                                     lim  rp(z) - rp(z.) 
                                     _.,      z - ZI 
                                                             13. DlrnDll'nAL  IIQVA'I'lOJq    In 
         Thus" is differentiable at each ~I E  U, .. W&II to be abown. 
               In the coune of the above proof the equation 
                                           ,,'(~) - "(~~» 
         W88 obtained.  Thia equation  can iteelf be coDlidered an immediate 00DIe-
         quence  of  the  eoroUary, since  once it  is  known thU  "  ill diI __ tiable, 
         the  application  of  the  chain  rule  to  the  equation  ~ - ,(.,{~»  liv. 
         1 - I'(,,(2:»,,'(z). 
               The  above  implicit  function  theorem  and  invene  function theorem 
          generalize  to  functions  of more  than  one  variable.. Their  pnenlilatioDa 
          wiD be proved  in  the  next  chapter,  after  the  neceaarr  pre)iminariel on 
          partial  differentiation. 
                                     I I.  EXISTENCE AND UNIQIJENUI  TIU.ORBM8 
                                       FOR ORDINARY DIFI'ERINTIAL  EQUATIONS. 
               Suppose that J is a eontinuoUl.real-valued  function  on & .-taiD  open 
          aubset  of  ~ and  let  (G, b)  be a  point  of this open IIUheet. To 101ft the 
          differential  equation 
                                              dy 
                                             .... -J(~,fI) 
          with the initial condition Y(G) - b means to find a dilerentiable nal-valuecl 
          function  "  on lOme open interval  in R eontaininc  G IUOh tbM for all •  ill 
          this  interval  we  have  ,,'(~) - /(., .,{s»  (this  impIiea tbM  the poID' 
          (z, ,,(~» must lie in the liven  open subset of B') and in Idditioa .,(.)  - •• 
          We note fimt. that  the interval  in R on which a eoIution " can be de8ned 
          may be rather  amall, even if the function /  ill defined on the "hoIe of .. 
          and is very nicely behaved.  For example, for any lIOlutioD "  of the diler-
          ential  equation 
          we have 
                                d tan-I ,,(.)            1 
                                     tis       -   1 + (f'{i»' .,'(.) - 1, 
          80  that  tan-I ,,(~) - ~ is  eonatant  on  any opeD  interval  on which "  ill 
          defined; if we impoee the initial condition  .,(O) - o. then the only __ 
          on an open interval  in R eootaining 0 is given by .,(~) - tan •• t.b\1l reetricf,. 
          ing  UI to  I~I < 11/2. Therefore  if we are  interested  in IOIviOl the above 
            I'll     ftIL  ~ DPIIOZIIIA'I'Ion 
            diI .. tial equation with initial  condition, all we can hope for in paet'Il 
            .. tba& alOlutioD exIat. on .... open interval containiq  (J.  Thie is indeed 
            the CMe, with no further conditicme, altho.  we iban not pIOV8 thie f-' 
            in tIaiI tat. However if we want the lOlution to be unique, which II highly 
            deIirabl.in  maD7 _, IODle funt. oonditioDl are nee.Fry.  For eiample, 
            if 1(., ,) - 81 ,ltII aocl (., b) -              (0,0), we have the two lOlutiooi ... <-) - 0 
            aocl ".c..) - ::t. Bence IOID8 condition mUit be impaled on lif we wiIh to 
            puaotee  a unique lOlutioD. 
                   The conditioD we abIIlllDpCIII'on I ia the followiqllO-Cllled LipdiU 
            ~: then exiata ME. such that. wbeaeYer (II,.,) and  (II,.)  are in 
            the open IUhIet of .. on which I iI cIe6necl we have 
                                              1/(11,.,) - I(s,,)  I ~ MI, - '1· 
             Thia oonditioD ia automatically _tiafied  if 1//" uiet.  and ia bounded in 
             the  Pv. opeD  sublet of .. and  if a vertical line 1IfIIID8Dt. U. entin1y 
             within tbia open let whenever it. extremitiel do, for in tbia cue the mean 
             value theorem enabl.  \II to write 
                                          I(s, ,) - I(s,.)  - (v -.) -I-(s, ,,), 
             for IOID8 ,  bet .... ,  _                •  (If ,  -    "  we take " - ., - .), 10 M may be 
             t&ktD to be any upper 1Jound for IBlI"I. 
             7'laeGrem. Lee I_ a CORM .... ~ /wf,t:liIw& on -                                             OJNI' ... 0/ 
             .. IAae contaiu  1M poaftt (a, b). 8"",. "..,. .." M. E •  ltd IAae 
                                               I/(s, ,) -/(s,.)1  ~ MI, -.1 
             ........ <-, ,) .. (s,.)  are ita 1M ,.,. .",. ... "AM "..,. ..." A E ., 
             • > 0, .- IAae "..,.  .." ....  _                           onlJ .... reakaluecl /tIrtI:liIIA "  on 
             (a - A, a + .) .- .., ,,'(s)  - f(., ,,(11» on lAit ..,."",.,  _                                 ,,(a)  -    b. 
                     For a continuoua real-valued function"  on an open interval in •  that 
              contaiDi a, the equatiODI ,,'(s)  -/(s, ,,(s»  and ,,(a) - b hold if and onI7 
              if ,,(s)  -    r. I(e, "(O)cIC + b, u  followa flOm the  fundamental theorem  of 
              calcuIua. ThUllOlvina the liven dilenntial  equation with initial condition 
              .. eqaivat.t  to IOlvina the Hln~ equation" 
                                                     ,,(s)  -    r. I(e, "(O)cIC + b. 
           . II to a function #I we ""te another  function F(",) whoee value at any s 
              .. (I'(#»(s)  - f: 1(', #(0)'"  + b, we lee  that  eoIviol  the integral  aqua-
                                                                               ,3.  DlrnUNTlAL  ~UATIONII  179 
            tion is the same 88 finding a function  II' such that F(tp) .. 11', that is, solving 
            a kind of fixed point  problem;  this is the basic idea of the proof, which we 
            now  proceed  to work  out  in  detail.  We  begin  by ,choosing some N E  H 
          , such  that  N  > I/(a, b) I, then  some r E  H, r > 0, such  that  the open ball 
             in E' of center  (a, b) and  radius  r is entirely  contained  in the open set on 
             which 1 is defined  and  such  that  I/(z, 1/) I <N whenever  (z,1/)  is in  the 
             ball.  Then  choose 1& E  H, 1& > 0, so that  h < r/2,  h < r/2N,  and  hM < 1. 
             The rectangle 
                                      Hz,1/)  E.EI : Iz - al S h, 111 - bl S Nhl 
             is then entirely  contained  in the open set on which I is defined and for each 
             (z,1/)  in this  rectangle  we have  lI(z, 1/) I < N.  We are  going to prove  that 
             there  exists one and only one continuous  function  II' on the closed interval 
             (a -    1&, a + h) such that tp(z) ...  f I(t, tp(t))dt + b 
             for  all  z E  (0 -       h, a + hI. To do this,  collSider the  complete  metric  space 
             C«(a - 11., a + h]) of all  continuous  real-valued  functions  on  the  compact 
             metric  space  (a - h, a + hI, 88  at the  end  of  Chapter  IV.  Let  B be  the 
             closed ball in C«a - h, 0  + h» of radius  Nh whose center  is the constant 
             function  b, that  is B  is  the  set  of all  continuous  functions 
                                         1/1:  (a -   h, a + h]-+(b  - Nh, b + Nh]. 
             Since B is a closed subset  of a complete  metric space, B is itaelf a complete 
              metric  space.  We claim  that  any  solution  of the  above  integral  equation 
              must  lie in B, that  in  fact  if II' is ... above  then  Itp(z) - bl < Nh  for all 
              z E  (a - la, a + lal.  For  if  there  exist  pointe  z E  (a - h, 0  + h1  such  that 
              I,,(z)  -    bl ~ Nil., let "'I be the greatest  lower bound  of  Iz - 01  for anluch 
              points.  Since  "  is  continuous  and  tp(a) - b,  it  follows  that  "'I > 0  and 
              I ,,(a :t: "'I) -    bl- Nil. for at leut  one  choice of the  sign  :t:.  Thus  Nh -
              I ,,(a :t: "'I) -    11'(0) I-I "'III" (ex) I, for  lOme ex  between  a and  a:t: "'I,  by  the 
              mean  value  theorem,  and  the  latter  expression  equals  I 'Y/(ex, tp(ex» I < 
              "'IN S AN, which  is a  contradiction.  Thus  any  solution  II' of  the  integral 
              equation  is in B. Now for any",  E  B define a new function 
                                                    F(",):  (a -      h, a + h) -+ H 
              by                               (F(I/I»(z)  -        f I(t,  ",(O)dt + b. 
              Since 1/1 E  B, for any  t E  [a - 11., 0  + 11.]  we have  II/I(t) - bl S Nil., so that 
              I(t, ",(t»  is defined, is continuous  ...  a  fUllctioll of t, and  11(t, !/I{t» I < N. 
          lID    VIII.  1I1700J1M1 .. APPIIOXIJIIA'l'I01f8 
          Hence lor s E [0 -1&, tI + 1&],  (F(~»(s) is defined and  I (F(~»(s) - bl-
          I £-/(', ~(e»dtl ~ Nis - til ~ IaN. Since  F(~) is  clearly  continuous  we 
         have  F(~) E B.  Thus  F: B - B.  If  ~,  wEB  then  for  any  element 
          :e E  (0 - 1&, tI + A]  we  have 
          I(F(~»(:e) - (F(w» (:e) I 
                            -I f: C/(e, ~(t)) - i(i, w(t)))dt I 
                            :S I- - til max (11<', ~(t)) -Ie"~ wet)) I : • e [a - A, a + An 
                            ~ I- - alMmu (I~(t) - w(OI : te [tl - A.a +1&11 
                            ~ AM tI(~. w), 
          where tI denotes  the metric  in B.  Thus 
                                     tI(F(~), F(w»  ~ A M tI(~, w). 
          But AM < 1, 110 that F is a contraction  map. The fixed point theorem  thus 
          8I8U1'8I  us of the existence  of a unique"  E B IlUch that"  - F(,,),  that is 
          IlUcIl that                   ,,(:e) - £-/(', ,,(O)dt + b 
          fo'r  aU  _ E [a - A, tI + AJ.  For  :e E  (a - A, a + A)  we  clearly  have 
          ,,'(_) -/(s, ,,(s» and  ,,(tI)  - b.  Thus  the  existence  part  of  the  proof  is 
          complete. However it is not immediately  obvious  that  the reetriction  of 
          "to (a - A, G + A) is the on1ylOlution  on (G - A, a + A) of our diI_tial 
          equation with initial concJition. To Me thia, note that the above proof would 
          have  lODe tbrouP with  A npIaoed by any A. E R llUoh that 0 < Aa < A. 
          ADy eolution  on  (G - A, a + A)  of  the  diI_tial  equation  with  initial 
          ooncIition PVII a eolution of the intesral equation  on [a - ha, G + Ai). But 
          we know that the intesral equation  hal a unique lOlution on [a - A., G + AiJ. 
          Thus  any  two  eolutiODl on  (a - A, a + A)  bave  equal  reetriotioDi  to 
          [a - AI, a + AaJ. Since thie is true for aU A. IlUch that  0 < A. < A, there  is 
          at moat one eolution on (a - A, a + A) and our proof is DOW complete. 
                The preceding  theorem  can  be generalised  to systems  01 fi!'lt  order 
          differential  equations  01 the fonn 
                                           :    -I.(s, '"  ... , ,.) 
                                           :    -/.(s,  '"  ... , ,.) 
                                           ":;  -/.(s,  l/., ..• , l/.) 
           with initial  conditionsl/.(a)  -~, i-I, 2, ... , n. Here functiona/ • .! ..... , 
          I. of "  + 1 variablee are pven, toptber  with  reU numben  ., &a, ••• , 6., 
           and the  problem is to find functiona ft,  ' , , ,'" of s  l&tiIfyiq  the  pno 
           equatiooa, Except for notatioDai eomplicatiooa, h                           pDII'IIbatioil  01 the 
           preceding  theorem is straightforward. However we are aIao inter.W  in 
           P'ting  ebarper results t.han have 80  far been obtained for ft - 1, 10 we 
           begin with a rather specific lemma that iIolatee h  technical detailI N1atina 
            to the fixed point theorem. 
            Lem.....        La II, " "I.  ". conhftUOUl ......... ..., /vIMJI;iIIu .. -                       .,. 
           ..., U of B-+I Uaat conItJina 1M poilU (a, &., ""  "). &qIpoM tAft ..... 
           N,MER'- Uaatlor .. '-1, ... ,ft 
                                                 1I,(s, Ul, "  "  ",)I < N 
            ~ (s, Ul, ' , " U.) E U aracI 
            1I,(z, Ul, , , "  11.)  -  I'(z, '1, ' , " .. ) ISM «(,. - .a)1 + ,., + <u. - .. )1)111 
                                                    I 
            ~ (s, ft, "  " U.), (s, II,  ' , "  .. ) E  u, La A E R, A > 0, ". auo\ lUI 
            fez, '1,  , .. , ,.) E 8'*1: Is - 01 SA, 
                                                        1'1 - btl S NA, ""  I", - b.1 S NAI C U. 
            T1Nft V AM v'ft < 1 IIun  ... one aracI cmlr one ....,.  (fIl, •• ".,.)  of 
            ~ ~ Oft tIae ifttenJGZ Co - A, a + A) .- IAa& I .. .. ,-
            1, ., ., ft,  ",'(z)  -/'(s,  fPl(s), ' , ., ".(s»  em '1Ma .,.".,  aracI ..,{a) - ... 
                  We want to find functiona fPl, """. atiafyiq  h  I)'Item  01 in..,.. 
            equatione 
                           ",(s)  -    r. l,e" fPl(C), .. "".(,»)dt  + ~ ,- 1, ... , '" 
            AnaloaouaIy to what "u done in the proof of the pnoedina theoraD, we 
            eoneider h        eom~ metric apace to - A, a + A) and h  complete  met.rio 
            apace IF of all eontinU0U8 functiona from (a - A, a + A) into B-, U  M the 
            end of Chapter IV. We indicate a function into B" by its.tuple  of oom-
            ponent functiona, 10  that  an element ~ of If is an a-tuple  (~ ••• , ~.), 
            where each ~, is a eontinuOUI real-valued function on (a - A, a + A) aad 
            for any s E (a - la, a + Ia) we have ~s) - (~(s), . , • I ~.(s», CoIIIkW tile 
            eubeet B of If coneiatinlof all ~ - (~., , , " ~.) eucb that  t#~s) -'"  S 1IA 
            for all  sEta -A,a+A)  and  all '-1, .. "ft,  In  the~ .... B 
            is not a ball in If,  u  it wu in the precedilll  proof, but it ... ..... 
            eubeet of If: for if '/I',.p,.p, '"  is a eequence of elements of B that  GOD-
            verpe  to the element # of If then for each z E (0 - A, a + A) we have 
                                                      lim t/I'(z) -    ~S), 
                                                      ~ 
            10 t.hM 
                                         lim f',(z)  - ~,(S),  i-I"", ft, 
                                         ~ 
          _       9IIL  ~ &JlnOJaIIAftOIiB 
          aDd fJom tile iDequaliti.  I~'(*) -'"  S Nil  for  aU j  we can Ultnfore 
          deduce If.(*) -'"  S NA, 10 that fEB,  thUl verifying the criterion for 
          cbure of the theorem of ,3 of Chapter  IlL Since B is a closed aubeet of 
          a complete metric apace, B is iteelf a complete metric apace. We claim tbat 
          if ,,- (fII, ••• , ".) E IF  _tid. the  above ayatem  of integral equatiOD8 
          tbID "E B, aDd in fact  I ~(*) - '"  < NA for aU * E [0 - II. 0  + h) and 
          all .i -   1, ••• ,tL  For  if there  exi8& pointe * E [0 - A. 0 + h] auch that 
           I~*) - 6.1 ~ NA for 101118 i, let -r be the pateat  lower bound of 1* - al 
           for all IUCh pointe *. Since each ~ is continUous and ~a) - .. we have 
          -r > 0 aDd  '~(a. -r) - 6.1- NA for 101118 i - 1, ••• , ft and at leut one 
           of the two chol_ of lip •. ThUl Nh -I ~-•  -r) - ~-) I-i-rw(a)  I , 
           for IOIDe  CI  bet ... _ and  a. -r, by the  mean value theorem,  and  the 
           lat.ter exprlllioD  equaIa  h1,(a, fII(a),  ••• , ".(a» I <.,N S IaN, a contra-
                     '11wI any aoIutioD " of the Bylltem  of integral equatiooa on [_ - A, 
           dietion. 
           _ + A) ia in B.  Now for any fEB de6ne another ft-tuple of functions 
           1'(#) - (I'.(f), ... , I'.(f»  from [0 - h, a + A]  into R by 
                               (I',(f»(*) - /.-/.(" f.(O, ~ .. , f.(e»dt + It.. 
           8inoe #E B, for  any t E [0 - A, a + A)  and  any  i-I, ••• , ft  we have 
           I f,(O - '" S NA, 10 that Ie', f.(O, ... , f.(t»  is defined, is continuoua .. 
           &  functioD of I,  and  1/,(', f.(O, ... , f.(e» I < N.  Bence  for  * E [a - A, 
           _ + AI,  (I'.(f»(s)  is defined and 
                         I (I',(f) )(*) -'"  ~ 1 /.-/.0, fa(O, ... , f.(e»dt I S NA. 
           Since IMh I'.(f)  ie  clearly  continuous,  we  have  I'(f) E B.  That  II, 
           1': B .... B. We now ahow that  F is a contraction map.  Let f, wEB.  For 
           aD7 s E l- - A, 0 + A) and i-I, ... , ft, 
            I (I'.(f»(s)  - (I'.(w»(*>1 
                                 -I J:' (J.(t, fa(O, •.• , #.(t» -/.(',  ,..(1), ••• , ,,,,,(0)>.1 
                                 ~ Is - -I DIU 11/.(1, fa(t), ... , f.(t» 
                                             -/'<', ... (0, .• " ... (t» I : , E [0 - A, a + All 
                                 ~ 1* - _1M DIU I"(f(i), tt(t»  : t E (0 -A, 0 + AU 
                                 ~ AM "(#, w), 
            (We have here UI8d the ame letter"  to denote the metrica in B" and in B.) 
            'l1luI 
                     "«I'(#»(s),  (I'(w»(*»  - (  t. «I'.<f»(*)  - (F,(w»(s»lr 
                                                            .... 
                                                      S A MVn "(f, w), 
            10 
                                      "(F(f),  F(w»  SAM Vi "(",, w). 
      Since we have 888UJDed that 1&Jf Vi < 1, ,  is indeed a contraction map. 
      Thus  by the fixed point  theorem  there is a unique"  .. ("',  ... ,.,.)  E B 
      such that "  - F(,,), that is, such that 
                  "",(z) ~ /.- I.{', ",(0,  ... , .,.(t»dt  + b, 
      for all z E (0 -la, 0  + Ia) and  all i-I, ... , n. For z E (1.1 - h,o + h) we 
      clearly have "",'(z) ... I,(z, fI1(z), •.• , .,.(z»  and "",(1.1) ... b , so the existence 
                                             i
      part  of the proof is &nished. To prove  that  the  reetrictions  of "', .•. , ". 
      to (0 - A, 1.1 +!&) are the only functions  with  the desired  properties,  note 
      that  the  above  proof  woUld have  gone  through  with  Ia  replaced  by  any 
      A. E  R such that 0 < Ia. < h. Any solution on (1.1 - h, II + h) of the system 
      of difterential equations with initial conditions gives a solution of the system 
      of intepal  equations  on (1.1 - h., 1.1 + Ad. But we know that  the system  of 
      intepal  equations  baa a unique lOlution on (1.1 - h., 1.1 + hi). Thus  any two 
      lOlutioDa on  (1.1 - h, 1.1 + h)  of  the  system  of  ditTerentiai equations  with 
      initial  conditions  have  equal  reetrictions  to  (1.1 - h., 0  + hi). Since this  is 
      true for all A. sUch that 0 < h, < h there is at mOlt one solution on (1.1 - h, 
      II + h) and our proof is complete. 
         Genera1ising our previous definition, we I&y that a real-valued function 
      I on an open sublet  of E-+l aatia&es a U,*"ilz  condition if there  exists a 
      number  MER such that whenever  (z, y., ... , Y.) and  (z, '"  ... , ,.)  are 
      in the open Bet on which I is defined we have 
       Il(z, ,., ... , ,.)  -/(z, '" ... , .. ) 1 S M «,. - ,a)1 + ... + (Y.  - .. )1)'/1. 
      This oondition can be given in another  way, for lince 
           1111 - _I + ... + I,. - .. I ~ (w. - .a)1 + ... + (,. - .. )1)'11 
                             ~ max (1,.- '.1,···, hi. - .. I t 
                             ~ 1.(1,. - •• 1 + ... + I,. - .. I), 
                               n 
      we see that  I eatiafies a  LipschitJI condition  if and  only  if there  exists 
      M' E R such that whenever I is defined at (z, Y"  ••. , Y.) and (z, '1, ... , .. ) 
      we have 
        I/(z,Ill,  ... ".) -/(Z,'I,  ... , .. ) 1 S M'(IYI - 'II + '"  + I". - .. I). 
       A.. a oonaequence it is possible to state  that a rather  large cl&88 of functioD8 
       tatiBfy LipschitJI conditioD8: a real-valued  function I on an open subset  of 
      11'*1 I&tisfies  a  LipschitJI condition  if  al/aYl, ... , af/ay. exist  and  are 
       bounded on the open set and if whenever (x, lIl, •.. , 'II.) and (x, '1, : .. , z..) 
       are in the open set so is the entire line segment between these two points. 
             184       VUJ.  SUCCBSIIIVII  APPROXIMATIONS 
             For 
              I/(x,  til,  ..• , tI .. )  -  I(x, 21,  ••. , 2 .. ) 1 
                                 ~ I/(x,  til,  ... , tI .. )  -    I(x, 21, til,  ••• , tI .. ) 1 
                                                   + If(x, 21, YI, ••• ,1/ .. )  -         f(x, 2" 2t, til,  ••• , tI .. ) 1 + ... 
                                                        If(x,  21,  ••• , "'-1,  tI .. )  -    f(x,  21,  ••• , ... ) 1 
                                                   + 
                                 - 1 (1/1 -     21)..2L (x, "1, til,  ••• , II,,) 1 + ... 
                                                     iJyl 
                                                   + I (Y .. -     ... ) ..2L (x, ZI, ••• , "'-1, ".) I , 
                                                                          iJy. 
             where for i-I, ... , n, ", is between ", and 2,  (or equal to them if these 
             latter  are equal), so that if Mil is an upper bound for lalJaYll, ... , lafla" .. 1 
             we have 
                 I/(x,1/I, ... ,1/ .. ) - I(x, 21,  ••• , ... ) I ~ M"(lYI  -                    211 + ... + I"" - ... 1). 
              Theorem.             Let II, ... ,I" be continuous real-valued lunctiom  on an open 
             subset of Eft+t that contains the point (a, b ,  ••• , b .. ). Suppose that ft, ... ,f" 
                                                                                  l
             satisfy Lipschitz conditions, that is there exists M E H BUc1& that 
              I/;(x,  1/1,  ... , Y .. )  -   f,(x,  21,  ... ,2 .. ) I ~ M (b/I -           2ill  + ...  + (Y ..  -           ... )1)1" 
             for i  ... 1, ... , n whenCller (x, tilt  ..• , Y .. ) and (x, 21,  ••• , z .. )  are in  tM given 
              open set. Then there exists hE H, h > 0, such that there exi.ts one and only 
              one n-tuple of real-valued function. (c,I>t, ••• , !P .. ) on (a - h, a + h) BUc1& that 
              for i  = 1, ... , n we hcult !p/(x)  "" f,(x,  !Pl(X), ••• , !P .. (.1:» on thi. interval and 
              !PiCa) =  b,. 
                     To prove this chOO8e some N E H such that 
                               N > max {I/t(a, b ,  ••• , b .. ) I, ... , 1/ .. (a, bt, ..• , b.) II, 
                                                             1
              then  some r E H, r > 0, such that  the open ball in ga+1 of center  (a, bt, 
               ••. , b.) and radius r is entirely contained in the open set on which fl'  ... , I .. 
              are  defined and  such  that  If,(x,  1/1, ..• , Y .. ) I < N  for  each  i "" 1, ... , n 
              whenever (x, tI"  ... , Y .. ) is in  the  ball.  If h E  H, h > 0, any  point  (x, til, 
               ... , 1/ .. ) E  ga+tsuch that  Ix - al ~ h, IYl - bll ~ Nh, ... , ItI .. -                                 b .. 1 ~ Nh 
              will automatically be in our open ball if hi + nNII&' < rl. Hence the theorem 
              results directly from the lemma if we take the  U of the lemma to be our 
              open ball, take the same fl'  ... , f .. , a, bll  ••• ,  b .. , N, M, and chooee hER, 
              h > 0, such that h < r/(l  + nNI)11t and hM Vn < 1. 
              Corollary 1.  Let ft, ... ,f .. be continuouB real-valued function.  on an open 
              aubset oj Eft+! that contains 1M point (a, b                             ••.• b .. ). Suppo.e that It, ... , I .. 
                                                                                   h 
              aatisfy Lipschitz condition •. Then if S is any open interval in H that contains 
              the point a there is at most one n-tuple oj real-valued functions (c,I>t, ••• , !P .. ) 
              on S such that lor each i =  1, ... , n we have !pl(x)  = f,(x,  c,I>t(x), ... , !P .. (x» 
              on S and !p,(a) = b,. 
                                                                     13. DlI'nUII'IUL  ~AftO...  111 
                 For  suppose  that  ('Pl, ... , .... )  and  ("'It  ••• , "'.)  are  two tHuples  of 
           functions  each of which satisfies the &iven conditiODI. W. mUit abow that 
           "1 - "'I, ... , rp." ..,  "'..  This  can  be acoompliabed by  a  .,.,.  limple  IIIIU-
           ment as follows: We begin by noting  that  by  the  uni~ pari  of the 
           theorem  the subset  of S &iven by 
                                    (a E S : ",(a)  - ",,(a),  i-I, .• " ,,) 
           is open.  By the  continuity  of 'Pl, •. "  .... , "'1, "', "'.. tbileubeet  it eloIed. 
           Bince S is connected  this  subset  must  be S itself  or the 8IDPt7 ... 8inee 
           the  subset  includes  the  point  a, we are  forced  to the ocmcIusloIl that  it. 
           must  be 8 itself. 
           Corollary  J.        Let I .. ... , I. be continuoua reakalued  /vrfI:litma •  ,. open 
           SUb8et U 01 E"+I that contaim the point (a, ba, •• " ba). 8uppotl II&at Ia, .•• , I. 
           aatiBlII lApachitz condition8. Let N I,  ••• , N. E R be aucA ".", 
                                              1I.{s, III, ••• , II.) I ~ N, 
           lor  all  i-I, ...• n  and all  (s, III, ... , II.) E u. Ld 8 C R  be .. .,. 
           interval containing the point a suck that 
           Then  there exiltt unique lundiana  'Pl: 8 -              R, ... , .... : 8 -   R  .- .., for 
           each i-I, .. " n we have .,/(s)  -I.(z, "1(2:), "', ".(s».S..,  ~.) - b,. 
                 If there exist functioDl'Pl,  ••. ,,,. with the stMed properties  tbIQ t.be,r 
           must be unique,  by Corollary  1. Also the equatioDa 
                  "'(2:) -    f 1.(2:, 'Pl(s),  "', .... (s»dz  + "',  s E 8,  i-I, ... ," 
           imply  19'i(z)-b.I~N,ls-al, 80  that  for  all  sE8  we  wUI  have 
           (z, "I(Z),  "', .... (z» E  Q,  where  Q  is the  aet  defined  b7 
           Q - (Z,lIl,  ... ,11.) E E·+I : s E 8, III' - "'I ~ N,ls  - al,i - 1, ... ,,,,. 
            (Bee Figure  33, which illustrates  the cue "  - 1). One ocmeequenoe of tbiI 
            is that  cps, ••• ,., ..  do not depend  at all on the valu.  of II, "', I. GUtiide 
            the set Q. That is, if we consider a similar  problem,  with all the same data 
            as at present  except that the values of I., ... , I. are altered  on U - Q, then 
            the same functions  "1, ... , .... will aolve both problems. But to &0 through 
            with the proof we must take into account  the behavior  of 11, ••• , I. outlide 
            Q, 80 we &0 to the trouble  of modifying I., .. " I. out.side Q in auoh a way 
                                     . -                                                      r - .,(z) 
                                                                                              Ilope-N 
                                                                                            I 
                                                            •         8 
            "..,..88. ,.... .. 0 - 1(., r) e .. : a: eS.lr - 'I~ NI_ -III.  for  &be  _ 
                            •  -   1 "  CaroIIIry  2 .. buIioaW by 1IIadiq. 
            thal  our proof wiD work.  All awdliari_,  we define functiolll "': B'- R, 
             i-I, ... ,ft,  by 
                                         {  N,I~ - cal + lJe  if  ,,- lJe  >                    N,I~ - cal 
                         ,.,(~,,,) -"                                    if I" - lJel S          N,I~ - cal 
                                            -N.J~-caJ+lJe  if  ,,-lJe <-N,I~-cal. 
             TbeIe f1lDClioDl ~., ••• , "" are continuous and for any ~ E 8 and "., •.• , 
             ". E R we have  (~, "..(~, II.), .•. , ""(~, II.»  E Q.  Betting 
                                  f4(~,,,., ... , ,.) -/'(~, ,..(~, ".), ... , ""~, ".» 
             for  Ie E B,  ra, . 0 0, ,. E R  and i-I, oO't ft,  we pt each g, continuous, 
             ,,.(S,,,., . 0  0, r.) J S N't and ,.(~,,,., ••• , ".) -/'(s,,,.,  ... , ".)  whenever 
             (S,,,., ... , ,.) eo. Now let II e R be INCh that 
             1/,(.,,,., ... , II.)  -/'(~, '"  ••• , .. ) I :S II ({JI. -              • .)1 + ... + (fl.  - .. )1) III 
             for  all  (s,,,., ••• ,,,.), (s, •• ; ... , .. ) e U  and i-I, ... ,ft.  It ia •  fact 
             that  for each (s, ,,), (~,.) E B' and each i - 1, •.. , ft  we have 
                                                I,.,(s,,,) - ,.,(~,.)/:S III -., ; 
             to  prove  this  it  IUflices to  euppoee "~', ",(~, II) ,. ",(z, .),  80  tbat 
                                                  " ~ "'(~, ,) ~ "'(~, .) ~ .. 
             ThUl for any ~ E 8,,, ..... , II., la,  ••• , .. E Rand i-I, ... , ft,  we have 
              I"(s, ra, ... , I/a) - g,(~, •• , ... , .. ) I                 .                                             . . 
                                -1/'(s, ,..(s, II.), .•• , ""(~, ".» -I,(~, ,..(z, • .), ... , ""(~, ':')11 
                                :S M«,..(~,II.) - "..(s, • .»1 + ... + (,..(~, fI,,) -                       ,..(~, .. »1)1/1 
                                :S M(<II. - • .)1 + ... + (II. - .. )1)111, 
                                                                         • 3.  DlrnUN'ftAL  ICQUATlON8           18'7 
           so that Ill • .•. , II. also satisfy  Lipschitz  conditions.  with the same M. Since 
           fi and  Ii have  the same  restrictions  to Q we may. if necessary, replace each 
           fi  by IIi so as to be able  to 888ume that  the open set  U in the statement  of 
           the corollary  is  (x. YI, •••• Y .. ) E  E,,+l  : x E  SI. Making  this  888umption. 
           choose hER, h > 0, such that S rontains  the dosed  interval  [a - h, a + hI 
           and such  that h M vn < 1, M being the constant  of the Lipschitz  condi-
           tions.  Then  the  lemma  tells  us  that  given  any  open  subinterval  of S of 
           length  2h WhOfie extremities  are  in S there  exists  a unique  solution  of  the 
           system  of differential  equations  Y;' ... f,(x. Yl, ••• , y,,), i  ==  1, ...• n on the 
           subinterval  with  arbitrarily  prescribed  values  of  Yl •••••  y. at the  center 
            of  the  subinterval.  Suppose  now  that  {9J1, ••••  (/) .. )  is  a  solution  of  the 
            system  of differential  equations  on an open  subinterval  S' of S  such  that 
            o E  S' and  (/),{o) -      b,. i-I • ...• n.  {For example,  one po88ible such S' is 
            (0 - h. a + h}.)  For  any  a E  S'  such  that  [a - h. a + h) C S  we  can 
            find  a  solution  (,/I&, ••• , !/I .. )  of  the  system  of  differential  equations  on 
            (a - h, a + h)  such  that  !/I,{a) - (/)i(a),  i ... 1,  ... , n.  By  uniqueness 
            (Corollary  1),  !/Ii(:r;) -      (/)i(:r;)  for  all  xes' r'\ (a -       h. a  + Il).  SO  that  we 
            can  put  the  (/);'S  and  !/I;'s to&ether  to  get  a  solution  on  the  open  interval 
            S'V (a - h. a + h). Choosing a close to the extremities  of S'. we see that 
            we can extend  «(/)1, •••• (/),,)  to a solution  of the system  of differential  equa-
            tions  on the open  interval  got  by lengthening  S'  by a distance  h at either 
            extremity.  provided  we still  remain  in the  given  interval  Sj otherwi1f8 we 
            can lengthen  S' up to all extremity  of S. Repeating  this procedure  will give 
            us a unique  solution  on all of S. 
            Corollary 3.  Let S C R be an open interval contai1ling a and let ft, ...• f .. 
            be continuow real-valued functionB on  (x. Yl, •.•• Y .. ) E  E"+l  : xES 1 that 
            BatiBJy Lipechitz conditions. Then for any b•••• , b .. E R there exist unique 
                                                                          l 
            /unctions  9Jl:S-+R,  ... ,(/).:S-+R  tn«:h  that  for  eod&  i-I ..... n  UHl 
            IlCllle (/)/(:r;) .. f,(x, 9Jl(x), ... , .,..(x»  on S and  'Pi(a) -          boo 
                   First  suppose  that  this  has been  proved  in  the  special  case  that  Is. 
             •.. , /. are bounded  011 the subset of E .. +l given  by  I (x, hi •...•  btl) : xES I. 
             Then for any ai, lit E  S such  that  al < a < ai,  the functions  /1, ... ,/. are 
             bounded  on  the  compact  subset  of  E"+I  given  by  ( (x. b , •.• , b.) : 
                                                                                                        l
             x E  [al. a.] I. so that  there  is a solution  of the  given  system  of differential 
             equations  with  initial  conditions  on the subinterval  (ai, lit)  of s. By Corol-
             lary  I, if we choose different  al. a, the solutions  we get will be the same on 
             the  intersection  of the  two  intervals  (ai, lit).  Since  any  point  of S is con-
             tained  in some subinterval  (ai, at)  of S, we thus  get  a unique  solution  on 
             all of S. Hence  we may suppose  to begin with  that It, ... , f .. are bounded 
             on  (x, b , ••• , btl) : x E  81. Let MER be such  that  if xES,  1/1, ••• , y .. , 
                          l
             81, ... ,.2. E  Rand  i  = 1, ... , n  we have 
              If.(x.  YI,  ••• , Yh)  -  fi(x,.21, •••• .2 .. ) 1 ~ M «YI  -      .21)2 + ... + (Y .. - .2 .. )1)112. 
           1.  l'ID.  SVCCII881VJI APPROXIMATIONS 
           Let hER, h > 0, be such that 8 contains the open interval  (a - h, /I + h) 
           and hM vn < 1. We shall show that  given any open subinterval  of 8 of 
           length 2h there exists a unique solution of the system of differential equa-
           tions 'l/l - I,(z, 1/1, ••• , '1/,,), i ... 1, ... , n, on the  subinterval  having  arbi-
           trarily  prescribed  values  of  '1/1, ••• , 1/ ..  at  the  center  of  the  subinterval. 
           Granting  this  and  reasoning aa at the  end of the  proof of the  preceding 
           corollary, given any solution of the system  of differential equations  with 
           initial conditions on 
                                        an open subinterval 8' of 8 such that (I E 8' and given 
           any  a E 8'  we can  get  a  solution  on  the  interval  8' V  (a - h, a  + h), 
           provided this latter  interval is contained in 8. We can repeat this procedure 
            to get a unique solution on all of 8, Thua we are reduced to proving the 
           corollary  in  the  special  C888  where  8 ... (a - h, a + h), M  is  aa above, 
           hMvn < 1, and thereis~number A E Rsuch  that  1/,(z, bt, ""  b.) I <A 
           for all z E  (a - h, a + h) and i-I, ' , "n. For lOme positive real number 
           N to be determined later define 
            U - ((Z,1/I,  .. ,,11 .. ) E E-+I:  Is - al < h,  111' - bil < Nh, i-I,  .. "  nt, 
            Then if (S,1/I, ",,11 .. ) E  U and i =  1, ' '"  n we have 
                   I"(z, 111,  ' , ,,1/,,) -  I,(z, b , ""  b,.) I 
                                                      l
                                        ~ M( t (11' - M·)tlt < M(nNW)lIt  - hMNVn, 
                                                 4-1 
            implying                    If.{z, 111,  • , "  11.) I < hMN vn + A. 
            We can now try  to  apply  Corollary 2 to  the  present  8, fl •. , . ,f., /I, bt, 
             ... , b .. and  U, taking  NI =  ...  = N .. =  N. All that  is wanting for Corol-
            lary 2 to go through, thereby  completing the proof of Corollary 3, is that 
             the inequalities 
                                                 lUx, 1/1, •••  , '1/.)1 ~ N 
             hold for all (z, '1/1,  ••• , '1/.) E  U and all i-I,  ... , n. But these are valid if 
                                                   hMNv"i+A  ~N. 
            Since  hM vn < I  the  laat  inequality  will  be  guaranteed  by  taking 
            N  ~ AI(I  - hM v"i),  80  we are  done. 
                   An almost immediate consequence of the laat result is the following 
             main theOrem on systems of first order ordinary linear differential equations 
                            2:'  =  14 ... (X)'l/1 + ... + U(.(z)y .. + Vi(Z) ,         i-I"  .. , n. 
                                                                                13. DlrnJIIIN'I'I4L  _VAftONI               119 
            Corollary  4.  IAt S C R be em open ifltmlal  conkli,u.,., lite point ,. _lor 
            e4Ch i, j  .... I,  ••• ," let Uq and  II,  be c:cmti"uou reoktalued lunt:tiou em 8. 
            TAm lor ony  b" ... , b. E R  there .., unique Ju'ffd.il1M fII: 8 - R •••• , 
            IP.: 8 -     R aUc1a t1&ot for e4Ch i-I, ... ," _  1aaH 
                                                              • 
                                               ",'(s)  -     1: Uq(S)IP/(S) + 11,(21) 
                                                              1-1 
            on S and ",(0)  ==. b,. 
                   If all of the functions Uij are bounded on 8, say  I~(s>l ~ II for all 
            S  E 8 and all i,i - I, ... , ", then if S  E 8  and lilt ... , Ifa, -It ...... E R 
            ·wehave 
                    I ( t Uq(s)1I1 + ,,(s) )  - (  t UiJ(s)~ + 1I4(s) ) I 
                         1001                                   Iool 
                                                                   S M<lIfl--II+'"                  +1,. - .. I), 
            our desired Lipechit. condition, 10 this corollary ClODlII directly  from the . 
            preceding one. If the Uq's are not bounded on 8  they  are ~ 
            bounded on the interval (41, fit) whenever 01. CIa E 8  and .. < ,. < CIa (for 
             each UiJ is bounded on (GI, GtJ), 10 we have a unique lOlution OD (..,..,. 
             We therefore hav~ a unique lIOlution on the union 01 all IUOh open intenala 
             (GI, CIa), which is 8. 
                    Higher order differential equatioDl are equivalent to ayatemI of &rat. 
             order differential equatiODl. For example, letting 
                                                         dr.             d'1/                    ~ 
                                    1/1 -   II,  1/1 -  .' 1/1 - d.r:"  ••• , II. - -..=r' 
             the ,," order differential equation 
                                               ~ -1(21. , t, .... Zl) 
                                                                  11
             is equivalent to the Byltem  of first order differential equatica 
                                                                ~-,. 
                                                                 • 
                                                                -t-.. 
                                                              dtI-a -II. 
                                                                a 
                                                                 1; - '(s, Ifl, 1ft, ••• , ,.). 
              Thua the next two corollaries are immediate oooaequencee of the theorem 
              and the last corollary l'eIIpectively. 
            1,.  YIII.  SVClCIIIIIIR  APnoXDIAftONa 
            CoroIIGry S.  Lee I be G toMrIVOUI reaHrcaluetI futtdilm  on em opeR  lUb.et 
            of ",,1  IAtJl COIIIcIiu 1M poW  (G. Co, ••• , e...s). Suppoae that I  lIOI.iajia G 
            UpdiIII  CO'Adititm, that u thera aiIU MER aucI& that 
             I/(s, '1,  ••••  II.)  - I(s.  al.  • •• , .. ) 1 S M (WI - as}1 + ... + (II .. - .. )1)111 
            UIIaeneNr (z. '1. . ... ,.) cuad (z. al. . .•• a.)  are  in 1M giveR opeR  Nt.  TIaMa 
            u..r. en. II E R. II > O. aucI& that there aialI  one cmd onlll  OM /uRClioR 
            .,:  (G  -   II. G + II) -       R aucI& that 
                                     d".,(z)          (              dfp(s)             d"-I,,(z»), 
                                    -,;sa-- /  s • .,(z).               tis  I···.  ..-1 
            lor call z E  (G - II, G + II) cuad ,,(a) - Co, ,,'(a)  - Ca,  •••• ,,( .. -1)(0)  -                        Ca-l· 
             Corollary  6.  Lee 8 C R be em open inler&ral contcaining 1M point a and ,. 
             .1. tit •••• ,u..  ,  be  toMrIVOUI reol-vdlued /t&f&t:lioM on  8.  TIaMa lor anll 
             Co,  ••• , Ca-l E R lluJre .D a  unique junclioR ,,: 8 - R aucI& that 
                                       ",., + .1,,'·-1) + ... + "-I'" + u.,. .. 11 
             ad .,(0)  - Ce, .,'(a)  - Ca •••••  ,,(_1'(0)  - e... .. 
                    Tbia  l .. t  ..wt  ie  of  COU1'II8 the  main  theorem  on  ordinary  linear 
             differential equUiona. We had pNrioualy  considered two notable apecial 
             _, DUnely the differential equations 
                                                   II' -'/(z)        (in Chapter VI. 14) 
             and 
                                          11"+11 -0                  (in Chapter VII. 14). 
             nOBLDII 
               1.  (a)  Draw diapama  to verify  that  Newton's method  01 80IviDI an equation 
                          1(.) - 0 wwb if 1 is a  twice dilereatiable  real-valued function on  an 
                          opeD  interval  U in  a that  cbangee lip,  whoee derivative is nowhere 
                           181'0.  and whose II8COIld derivative does not ehalJl8 sign,  provided that 
                           the point 3rt E U is 80 choeen that  aIao Sa E U i indeed UDder theae oil-
                           aulll8tanCl8 the sequence Sit %I, ZI.  • ••  is monotonic. 
                    (b)  U. Problem 12. Chapter V to prove theae facta. 
               I.  LIt. E a, • > O. Show that applyinc Newton's method to the function zI - • 
                    Pwa the formula %a+a- ~(z. + i:). Prove that  Newton'a method  works 
                    for arrr 3rt > 0 by Ihowine that  then  Sa ~ v'Ci and  the map  sending  S  iato 
                    1(. +~) is a contraction  map oils E R : S ~ v'Ci1. (This method  01 find-
                    inc equare roots 0CleUI'II in ancient Babyionian manuscripts.) 
                                                                                                       no ......        191 
            3.  Prove  tbat the equation  COl % - •  -                t - 0 baa a uDique reallOlution.  ShoW' 
                 that  the  fixed point  theorem  is applicable to  the f\lllCtlon '(%)  - COI:c  - t 
                 and the interval [0, .,/4)  and thereby  find this 101ution to three decimal placea. 
             4.  Find  the  "maximal"  U, II'  of  the  implicit  function  theorem  if  I(x, V)  -
                 zI + " - 1 and (G, b) - (0, 1). 
             5.  Generalise  the  proof of the implicit  function  theorem  to get  the following re-
                 suit:  Let I be a continuous  real-valued  function on an open subset of Ea.1 that 
                 contains  the  point  (aa, ... , a., b),  with  f(aa,  ... , a., b) - O.  Suppose  that 
                  8//8V  exists and  is continuou8 on the given open subset  and  that 
                                                      ~ 
                                                      8y (ai,  •.. , a., b) "  O. 
                  Then there exi8t positive real numbers h and I: such that  there exists a unique 
                  function 
                           11':  I (x\,  ... , :c.) E E" : (::1 -  GI)I + ... + (Zo - 0,.)1 < hll 
                                                                                  -+ Iy E R : Iv - 61  < 1:1 
                  such that I(xa,  ... , z., Ip(x\, ... , z.»  - 0 for all (z\, .. , Zo) in question. 
             6.  Expand  the following argument  into a proof of the implicit function  theorem 
                  that  avoids  the use of the fixed point  theorem:  Take  r > 0 such  that I is de-
                  fined on the entire  open ball in E' of center  (a, b) and radius  r and  such that 
                  aI/a, is never aero on this ball. Choose A: such that 0 < A: < rl then  choose A 
                  such that 0 < A < ~ and I is nowhere aero on the set 
                                         «z, V) E E':  Iz - al  < A,  IY - bI  - kl. 
                  Then I is sero at precisely one point  of each  vertical  section of the  rectangle 
                                         I(z, V) E E':  Iz - aI  < A,  IY - hi  < 1:1· 
             7.  Find  all solutions on R of the differential equation  V' - 31 Villi. 
             8.  Solve  the  system  11' - 2 vTYT, V(O) - O.  (There  is  an  infinity  of  answerll, 
                  with essentially four different onel  near x - 0.) 
             9.  Apply  the  method  of proof of  the  first  theorem  of  .3 to  solve the  system 
                  y' - y, yeO) - 1,  starting  the  IlUcceasive approximations  with  1/10 - 0,  ob-
                  taining  thereby  a power series expansion 01 the solution. 
            10.  Modify the  proof of the  first theorem  of 13 to show that  we may  take for A 
                  any  positive  real  number  less than  11M such that  the open subset  of E' on 
                   which I  is  defined  contains  I (z, 11) E E' : Iz - al ~ 1&, y E RI  by  showing 
                   that for IIlch an A the given formula for F defines a contraction  map on all of 
                   O(tG -1&, G + hI), not just on a ball B. 
            11.  Suppose that  the conditions  of the first theorem  of  t 3 obtain  and  that  -J, is a 
                   real-valued function on some open interval  of R one of whose extremities  is G, 
                   1/1 having  the  properties  that  I/I'(z) - I(z, 1/1 (x) )  and  lim I/I(z) -           b.  Prove  that 
                   I/I(x) =  11'(%) whenever both  expressions are defined.  .-
             12.  Show that  Corollaries 3, 4 and  6 of the  last  theorem  remain  valid if, instead 
                   of being an open interval,  S is R itself. 
            191      \0111.  IUCCDIII8IVJI API'llOXlMA'I'lONI 
            13.  Provo that if til,  UI,  ••• , u., II are real-valut'd functions on R that  are til  tlmee 
                  dltrerentiabJe, then any IIOlution of the differential equation 
                                         ~('"  + UI(S)~(-" + ... + u.(s),  - pes) 
                 . is (ft + m) timee differentiable. 
            If.  Let [G, 6J be a cloeed interval in R and let A and K be continuous rea1-valued 
                  functicms on I .. 6J and {(s, ,) E BI : s, ,  E (a, 6]J respectively. U # E C({a, 6D, 
                  define F(#)  E C({a, 6)  by 
                                          (F(.,,»(s)  -     A(s) + J.' K(s,~) #M IlJ 
                  (the continuity of  F(.,,)  followilll from Prob.  15, Chap. VI). Show that  if 
                   1(6 - a) K(z, ~>I < 1 for all s, y E (a, 6]  then  F  i. a  contraction map, and 
                  therefore there is a unique"  E C«(a, b» such that 
                                              ,,(x)  ... A(s)  + f K(:r, II) "(11) fly 
                  for aU x E (a, b]. 
            15.  Let [a, b] be a closed interval in R and let A and K be continuous real-valued 
              ,   functions on (a, b) and I (s, ~) E E' : a ~ II ~ z ~ 61  respectively. Prove that 
                  there is a unique"  E C(la, 6» such that 
                                              ,,(x)  -  A(x) + J: K(s, y) ,,(y) IlJ 
                  for all s E (a, 6).  (Hint:  Imitate  the  procedure of  the  precedilll problem if 
                   1(6 - a) K(z, II) I < 1 whenever a S y ~ s ~ 6. To do the pneral  _, note 
                   that  for any  al E (a, b), the  problem reducea to provine the existence of  a 
                   UDique '" E C([a, al)  such that 
                                             ",(x)  -   A(z) + J.. K(s, y) ",M IlJ 
                   for all s E (a, al) and the existenoe of a unique fII E C«(al, 6)  such that 
                             fII(S) -    A(s) + /:1 K(x, II) ",(y)  fl" + /; K(x, II) filM flll 
                   for all s E (a., 61.) 
   CHAPTER  IX 
    Partial Diflerentiation 
             ThiI chapter ia concerned with exteDdioctbe meth-
           oda of one-variable differential calcul_ to fwlctloDI. of 
            more than one variable. There .... few difIiGultia, once 
            one bu the  ClOl'ftlCt de6nifiion of difleNIltiabillV for 
            functiona of aeveral variabl •. 
        1M  IX.  P.um.t.L  Dll'nUIII'IUTION 
                                     11.  DEFINITIONS  AND BASIC PROPERTIES. 
              Partial  derivatives  are themaelves a matter  of one-variable  differential 
         calculUi. .A. luch  they  have already  made their  appearance  in thietext  in 
         our diecuaaioDII of differentiation  under  the inte&rallign  and the implicit 
         funct.ion theorem. They were aleo alluded  to in our diacUllion of ditlerential 
         equationt,  in connection  with Lipechitl  conditiooa.  Let us recall their defi-
         nition,  restricting  ounelv.  for  convenience  to functiont  on open subeeta 
         of B-. 
              For any poeitive integer  ", any open subeet  U of g., any real-valued 
         function  /  on  U, any  point  a - (GI, ••• , a.) E U and any  i-I, ... , ", 
         the illt. pGrtial dIriIatiH all til G is defined to be the derivative  at CIt of  the 
         real-valued  function  which sends So into /(GI, "., "'-I, Zi, 41+1 ••• ,,4.),  if 
         this  derivative  exists. (The  expl'e88ion /(a"  ,. , , "'-I,  :t., 41+1, ••. ,4.)  is of 
         coune  to  be  understood  as / (ZI. CIt, ••• ,4.)  if i-I and  in  like  manner 
         II /(GI •••. , Go.-l,~) if i-ft.  Note  that  the function  sending  2:t into I(Gl, 
          . , ., "'-I,  :t"  41+1, ••• , a.)  is  defined  on  an  open  subset  of  R  that  con-
         taint  CIt, 10 that it makes aenae to speak  of the derivative,  if it exists.) The 
         .... partial  derivative  of /  at G is often  denoted  /I(a)  or  :! (G). Thus we 
         can write 
            If()     ~/)  l'         1(Gt, ... , "'-I,  So, 41+1, ... , a.)  -/(Ga,  ... , a.) 
            "  a  -~G - 1m                                                              • 
                     iZt·....                             %I-a; 
          If /I(a)  exiata for each  G E U we set a  real-valued  function  /t on  l! (aleo 
          denoted  a//azi) whose value  at any  a E U is JS(G); thie is the  , ... partial 
          dIriIatiH oj J, 
               We remark that there are many other notationt  for partial  derivatives, 
          none of which ,hall be used in this text.  Alternate  notationt  for n - a/lin. 
          include 
                                         /.., I .. , and DJ, 
          the analoaoua notationt  for" (a) - !, (a) being 
                                   I;'(G),  I .. (G), and  (DJ)(a). 
          11leee are often  expanded  to /[(Gl,  .• "  a.), ~(alr ... , a.), etc.,  and  one 
          evtD finda                                      iJZt 
                                                 a/(Ul, ... , u.) (         )   tc 
                                                       au.        GI,  .. "a.,  e  . 
                                                         11. DBnNITIONS  AND BASIC PBOPSRT1B8            195 
          There  are  clearly  many  possibilities for confusion and  more will appear 
          later.  No  systematic  notation  is perfect,  although  some are  better  than 
          others.  The only essential is that  we know exactly  what is meant  in any 
          given instance. 
                 How should the notion of ditJerentiability  be defined for functions of 
          several variables? The original definition by means of difference quotients 
           (f(z)  -/(zo) )/(z  -:1:0)  does  not  generalize  immediately.  A  de6nition  of 
           ditJerentiability  for  functions  of  more  than  one  variable  Ibust  be  given 
           which does more than refer to partial  derivatives,  for all the partial  deriva-
           tives  of a  function  may  exist at a  point  without  the function  being well-
           behaved  there.  For example, the  function  on ,.. which has value  zero at 
           the  origin  (0,0)  and  the  value  zy/(zi  + 11'>  at  any  other  point  (z,1/)  is 
           such that  ~(O, 0) and ~(O, 0) exist (and equal zero), but I is not even 
                         Bz                 By 
           continuous at (0, 0). It turns out that the property  of being closely approxi-
           mable by linear functions can be generalized and this will give us the desired 
           definition, as follows. 
           Definition.        Let I be a real-valued function  on an open subset  U of Ea. 
           Let  Il" (ai,  ..• , tla) E U.  Then  I  is  differentiable at  Il  if  there  exist 
           CI,  ••• , c,. E R such that 
                     lim  I/(z)  -    (f(a)  + CI(ZI - Ill) + ... + c.(z.  - tla»  1 _  o. 
                      --                                d(z, Il) 
                 The  Zl, ••• , z.  in  this  definition  are  the  coordinates  of  z,  so  that 
           z =  (Zl, •.• , z.).  The  d  denotes  the  metric  in  E·,  that  is  d(z,ll)  = 
            «ZI - 1l.)1 + ... + (z.  - tla)I)III. 
                  The limit  condition  in  the  above  definition  is sometimes  more  con-
            veniently stated  as follows: given any  e > 0, there exists a 3 > 0 Buch that 
            if z t  U and d(z, Il) < 3 then 
                     I/(z)  -   (f(a)  + Cl(ZI - Il.) + ... + c,.(z. - tla»  1 S ed(z, Il). 
            The symbol  S  iB used here  rather  than  < in order  to  include  the  case 
            z - Il. 
                  If for  any  i ... I,  ... , n  we set  Z  -      (ai,  ... , 1l'_I, Z"  1l1+1, .•• , tla)  in 
            the above definition, we get 
                     .    1/(IlI, ... , tli-., Z"  tli+I, ... , tla) -/(0.)  -   c,(z,  -  0.;) 1    0 
                     1
                     ~                                                                           =  , 
            or      -,-,                                IZi  - 0.;1 
                            .    1/(1l   '  •• , tli-l, Zi, tli+I, .•• , tla)  -/(0.)     1   0 
                           1          1o
                            1m                                                      -Co  ...    , 
                          ai".i                       Zi  - 0.; 
            so that 1[(1l) exists, and  indeed 11(0.) = Ci. Thus  if I is differentiable  at  a 
            then  the  coefficients CI, .•• , c,.  are  unique  and  equal  to f{ (a), ... ,/~(a) 
            respectively. 
            196     IX.  p.um.u. DlrnBBNTlATlON 
                  The following technical lemma will prove useful on I8Vel'al 0ClClIIIi0ne. 
           "."......        L« I be a reakalued  function on em open ""*' U 01 B" ... ,., 
           a E U.T_ I u dijferentiGbk at  a if _                              oral" if "...,  .., ~ 
           ~ AI, ..• , A. on U, continuoua at a, aucI& tAae 
              I(z)  - 1(0) - AI(z)(zl - a.) +  A.(z)(z,  - aa) +  ..•  +  A.(z)(z.  - .. ) 
           lur all z E U. In tAu Ct.I86, lur each i ... 1, ... , n _  have /I(a)  - A,(a). 
                  If I is differentiable at a we have 
                  Um I/(z)  - U(a) + ,t:.(a)(zi - a.) +  ...  + f,.(a)(z.. - .. » I _ o. 
                   -                                         d(z, a) 
            8inoe 
            des, a) -     «Zl - a.)1 + ... +  (z. - .. )1)1/1 S IZI - ",I +  ..•  + Iz.  - .. I, 
            if we deftne the function  a: U -               R by 
                     t{)        I(z)  -    U(a) + I~(a)(zi - a.) +  •..  + f,.(a)(z. - .. » 
                        s  -                        ISI-",I+  ... +ls.- .. 1 
            for :t .. a and  I(a) - 0 we have lim  a(z) - 0 and 
                                                            -
            f(:t)  -  1(0) + fs(O)(ZI - a.) +  ••• + f.(o)(z.  - .. ) 
                                                                    +  e(s)(/zl  - ",I +  .••  + Iz. - .. I) 
            for all z E  U. Setting 
                                                    A.(z)  .. Il(a) ± a(z) 
            for i-I, ... , n, with the plus sign being chosen if Zi - 04 ~ 0, otherwise 
             the minus sign, we get 
                            I(z)  -/(a)  = AI(z)(zl - al) +  ... +  AII(z)(z. - 0.) 
             and  lim A,(z)  = /lea) = Ai(a), which proves  half  of the lemma.  For the 
                    -
             convel'88, if  A I,  ••• ,  A.:  U -        R  are  functions  continuous  at  a  luch  that 
                            I(z)  -/(a)  - AI(z)(zl - al) + ... + A.(z)(z.  - .. ) 
             then for Z E  U, z .. a, we have 
             I/(s)  -    (1(0)  +  AI(a)(z~ '- al) + ... + A .. (a)(z. - 0.»  I 
                                                   d(z, a) 
                               I (AI(z) - AI(a»(zl  - al) + ... + (A.(z)  - A.(a)}(z.  - .. )! 
                           -~~~--~~--~~~~~~--~~--~~ 
                                                                       d(z, a) 
                           S  IAI(z) - Al(a) II~(;,-:;' +  ... + IA.(z) - A.(a)!  '~;:sl 
                           S I Al(z) - AI(a)'! + ... + I A.(z)  - A.(a) I. 
                                                    11.  DJlftNmOQ  AND BAllO no........  197 
          By the continuity  of AI, .•• , A. at a, the laat exprellion. approachea the 
          limit sero 88 % approaches a, proving that I is differentiable at a and ...., 
          that fl(G)  -   A.(a) for i-I, ... , ft. 
                Note that if ft  > I, the functions AI, •••• A. appeariDa in the lemma 
          are certainly not unique. 
          Proposition.       Let U be Gft open aubad 01 E", I: U -        R. 111 Sa diI""""" 
          at G E U, then f ia contifttWU3 at a. 
                For if AI, •.. , A. are 88 in the lemma, then 
                  limf(%)  .. lim  (f(G)  + A (z)(%1 - at> + ... + A.(s)(s.  - crJ) 
                   ....         ....             I
                             -/(a)  + AI(G) • 0 + ... + A.(a)  ·0 -/(a), 
          80 I is continuous at a. 
                It would obviously be of great value to have lOme praotical criterion 
          for the differentiability of a function at a point. Such a criterioD II alonled 
          by the following result. 
           TMorem.  Let U be (1ft  opM ...",.,  0/ ... I: U - •• /tilt", ...... ,.... 
          tial  thrivGtillu  I., ... ,/~ esial on U ........  ~ -' .. ,...,  • e u. 
          Thm I ia di8t/f'efttiable at a.                        . 
             Without 10IIII of genen1ity  we may IllUme  that  U II .. .,. blUlll  .. 
          of center a. Then for any % -         (SI,  •••• s.) E u. all of the pain. 
           (%1, •.. , z.),  (ai,  ZI,  .•. , s.),  (ai, lit,  Stt  •••• s.), 
                                                            .... (al, ... , ..... t s.),  (CIt, ••• t e.) 
          are in U and 80 are all pointe of all line aepnenta betwe8ll .Y CODIeCUtive 
          two of these pointe. Writing                                                            . 
          fez)  -/(G)  ==  (f(ZI,  ... , S.)  -/(Ot,  ZI, .... s.» 
                              + (f(al,ZI,  ... ,s.)  -/(a •• ..,-,  ... ,e.» 
                                              + ... + (J(aa, ........ I.e.)  -/( ... ... , .. » 
           and applying the mean value theorem to write 
                     l(xI,  ..• , z.)  -/(al,  ZI, ••• , s.)  - !left, Zt, ••• t S.)(SI  -.., 
              I(al; ZI, •.• , z.)  -/(a.,  lit, Sa, ••. , z.)  - ft(a., f" St ••••• s.)(Zt  -  a,) 
                   I(al, ... , a,,-I,  s.)  -/(al,  ... , a,,)  -I;(a., ... , .... 1. Ea)(s. ~ Ga), 
           where each ~i is between a, and Xi  (or E ... /J4 - s, if G4 - s.),  w. obtain 
          I(s)  -/(a)  ... fa(EI, ZI, ... , %.)(ZI - 41) + IHOt, ft, ZI, .... z.)(Zt - a,) 
                                                        + ... + 1~(4t, ..• , a-a,~.)( .. - a.). 
         1.  11.  •• II'IU.L  DlrnBIIN114110N 
         Suppoae that for each Z E U a specific choice of ~1, ••• ,  ~ ..  is made. Since 
         ft, .. " f~ are continuous at a we have 
                                   lim "(~1, Zt, ... ,z .. ) = f~(a) 
                                    .... 
                                lim f;(al, ~t, ZI, ... ,x.)  - f;(a) 
                                 -. 
         Hence the differentiability  of f  at a follows from the  lemma  to  the  pre-
         ceding propoeition, taking 
                                     Al(z)  - n(E .. x"  ••. , z.), 
                                     A,(x)  ... neal,  Et, ZI, ... , Z.), 
               A real-valued  function f on an open subset  U of E" is called differen-
          ~ Oft U (or just differentiable) if it is differentiable at each point of U. 
          A neceIII&I'Y condition  for this is that ft, ...• f~ exist on  U. f is called con-
          tinuoualy differentiable Oft  U (or just continUO'lUly differentiable) if ft, ... , f~ 
          exist and are continuous  on  U; thill terminology is re&l!Onable because the 
          theorem implies that lIuch a function is necellll&rily differentiable. It ill easy 
          to  give  many  examples  of  continuously  differentiable  functions.  For 
          instance, any  polynomial  in  the  coordinate  functions  Zl, .. . ,:t,.  on  E"  is 
          continuoualy differentiable on E". 
               Reca1I that a map f of any Bet U into E- is determined  by its m com-
          ponent  functions  /t,  ... ,f.: U-R and  we often  write f= (fl • • :.,f.), 
          this meaning thatf(P)  = (/t(P),  . .. ,J.(p»  for any p E U. If U is an open 
          IUbeet of E" and  a E U we know that f is continuous  at a if and only if 
          fl'  .. " f .. are  continuous  at a. It is therefore  reasonable  to define f to  be 
          differentiable at a if /t,  ... , f. are differentiable at a. Similarly. f is said to be 
          differentiaIJU if fl'  ... , f. are differentiable. f is called continuoU8ly differen-
          ~ if II •... ,f. are  continuoualy  differentiable. 
               Exactly  &8  in  one-variable  calculus,  a  differentiable  function  of  a 
          differentiable function is differentiable.  More precisely, we have the follow-
          ing "chain  Nle". 
           TIaeorem.     Let U, V be open eubNl4 of E", E· reapectively and let J:  U -   V, 
          ,: V -   R be /unction.. Ld a E  U be 8UCA that I i3 differentiable at a and 9 
          ill diI~ at I(G).  TAen ,  • I ia differentiable at G and Jor j  - 1, .•.• n 
                                                 • 
                                   <II .n;(a) - 1: ,:(f(G»(f~)i(a) . 
                                                 .. 
                                                  ,1.  NftIG'ftONa  AND IWIIO no........    199 
              Since,  II dUf .. tiabIe a~ /(0)  - (fl(a), ••• , /.(0»,  the lemma proved 
         earlier impli.  the uiItenoe  of funct.ioDe Aa, •.. , A.: V -., each con-
         tinuoue at /(0),  auoh that 
                ,(J)  - f(J(0»  - AI(,)(,.  -/1(0»  + ... + A.(,)(,.  -/.(0» 
         for aU 'II E V. SimiI&rIy for each i-I, ... , m the function /, II ditrerentiable 
         a~ a, 10 there exiA functioDa BA,  ••• , B .. : U -., each continuous at II, 
         aueb that 
                    Ices) -/J.a) - BA(S)(Sa - a.> + ... + B .. (s)(:r. - a.) 
         for aU s E U. Therefore 
                                                 • 
                        f(J(s»  - ,(J(o»  - 1: A,{J(s» (J,(s) -/,(0» 
                                                 w 
                                                 •             • 
                                             - 1: AcC/(s» 1: Bu(s)(SJ - OJ) 
                                                 4001         1-1 
                                             - t ( t AcC/(s»B4j(s) )(SJ - OJ) 
                                                 1-1   4001              . 
          for aU s E U. Since each Bu II continuous at a, since / is continuoue at a, 
          and. since each A, Ie continuoua at /(0),  we deduce that each function 
                                      t (A.o/).  Bu: U-R 
                                       4001                 • 
          II ooatinUOUI at CI.  By the lemma, '0/ Ie dUferenti&ble at o. Moreover, 
          apin by the lemma, each "'{J(o»  - AcC/(a» and. each (fo)~(o) -Bu(o), 
          10 thatfor  each i-I, ... , " 
                                        •                       • 
                        (goniCo) - 1: AcC/(o»Bu(a) - 1: f'.{J(G»{Jo)i(o). 
                                       4001                    4001 
                U the /  and. ,  of the theorem are differentiable functions the con-
          ohllion 
                   can be written in the slightly simpler form 
                The chain rule is the oocuion for much imprecilion in notation. For 
          example, the equation 01 the theorem ia often written in the form 
                                         ...!L _ t  11.. .ll1 
                                          ~  w  8/.  ~. 
            JOG     IX.  PABTIAL  DIPPIlRIlN11A110N 
            This is not literally correct sinne, among other faults, g is not a function of 
            Z - (ZI, ••• , z .. ). A correct  version of this formula using the a notation  is 
            the cumbersome 
             ag(/l(ZI,  ••• , x,,), ••• , / ... (Xlp ••• , x..» 
                                      aXI 
                         .;.. 8g(YI, ••• , Y .. ) (J (                )        f,  (              »a/;(xl, ... , x.) 
                     ==  L.I          .:10..         I XI, ••• , x.. , ... , .. Xl,  ••• , x..               ...         . 
                         ;"1          "1/'                                          .                        fiX; 
            The kind of oversimplification appearing  in the fi1'8t formula often results 
            in confusion in practice. Here is a typical example: Suppoee that,  ... 2x + u 
            and  that  u ==  X + Y,  80  that.  ==  3z + y.  Regarding.  as  a function  of X 
            and u we have a./ax =  2, but regarding.  as a function of X and Y we have 
            a./ ax =  3. The explanation  of this anomaly is that  the single symbol • is 
            used here  to  represent  two  distinct  functions.  In  fact  let  /: E' -                           E'  be 
            given  by  lex, II) -         (x, x + II)  and  let  g: E' -            R  be  given  by  g(x, II) -
            2%'+ II.  Then  the  symbol,  etande  for both  g(x, tI)  (i.e., the  funetion  g) 
            and g(f(x,  II»  (i.e., the function g on, 80 that the two U8eII of a,/ax  above 
            really represent  the distinct  functione g' and  (g o/){. 
                   The following paragraph,  which will not be required in what followa, 
            ie intended  for students  adept  in linear algebra.  We consider E" a vector 
            apace over R, defining addition  and scalar multiplication  by the formulae 
                              (XI,  ••• , x.)  + (1/1, ••• , 1/ .. )  =  (XI + Ill, ••• , x.. + II.) 
                                                  C(XI, ••• , x.)  .. (CXI, ••• , cx..). 
             If U is an open subset of E" and /: U - EM is differentiable at  the  point 
             aE U, define a  linear  transformation  (a): E--E'- by  means  of  the 
             m Xn matrix 
                                         (11',)'(a»                         .. (  aI, (a») 
                                           v'  ii-I ... ..... ;i-I ..... II         aXJ 
             (called  the  jacobian  matrix  of J).  That  is,  if  (Zl, •.• , x..) E  E- we  set 
            /'(a)(xI,  ... , x .. ) ==  (Yt, .•. , Y ... ) E  Em,  with  1/1, ••• ,1/...  defined  by  the 
             matrix  product 
                                                                                 .. 
             80 that  for each i =  1, ... , m we have 1/; -                    E (/;)J(a):I:;. Then  the differ-
             entiability of I at a implies that                                 1-1 
                                        I.     d(j(x),/(a)  + /,(a)(x  - a» 
                                         1m                                               -0. 
                                         ....                  d(z, a) 
                                                                         12. R10HU DSlUVATIna             101 
           (Note that  in the top line of the  formula d refers to distance in B-, while 
           in the bottom  hlle it refers to distance in P.)  Collversely if U is an open 
          subset of E". I: U -         E'" a map, and if we have a point a E  U and a linear 
           transfonnation  T: E" -         E'" auch that 
                                      ·    d(j(z) , I (a) + T(z  - a»            0 
                                     I
                                     1m                                       -    , 
                                     -.                d(z, a) 
           then  we verify immediately by looking at the coordinates of I(s)  that I is 
          differentiable at a and that  T ..; /,(a).  (Thus  the differentiability  of I at a 
           and the linear transformation  /,(a)  could have been defined without felOn 
           to component functions.) Our statement  of the chain rule tranalatea to the 
           statement  that the 1 X n matrix for (g 0  f)'(a)  is the product  of the 1 X m 
           matrix for g'(f(a»  by the m X ft  matrix for /'(a);  in other  words we have 
           the equality of linear transformationa 
                                          (g 0/)'(a)  - ((f(a»  • /'(0). 
           Thia la.et atatement  hIuI an immediate generalization to t.he following neat 
           venDon of the chain rule. which is exactly analogous to the correaponding 
           one-variable  result  (cf. la.et proposition  of  12, Chapter  V):  If  U, V are 
           open aubeets of Ea, E'" respectively  and  I: U- V, g: V-~ are  func-
           tions, with I differentiable at the point a E  U and g differentiable at I(a). 
           then  g 0 I is differentiable at a and 
                                          (g 0  f)'(a)  -   g'(f(a»  • I'(a). 
                                                                       12.  HIGHER DERIVATIVES. 
                 Higher order partial  derivatives  are defined similarly to higher order 
           ordinary derivatives.  Let U be all open aubeet of E", I: U -                     R a function, 
           and  i, i  integers  among  1, 2, ... ,ft.  If It exiata on  U we may be able  to 
           define the ii'" second order partial derivative 01 I aI a (Jf)J(a) for lOme point 
           a E  U. If (fl)j(a)  exists for all a E  U we get a  new function  (I:>i on  u. 
           If (fa:  exists and  k ... 1, ... , n.  we may  be able  to define the  ijlr!" IIftrd 
           order partial derivative 01 I aI a «(fm)'(a),  and if this exiate for all a E U 
           we have a function  «(faD •. And 80 on for still higher order derivatives. 
                 (fa:  can  al80 be written  ~ al ), which i. uaually  abbreviated 
                                                     aiJ\ a~ 
           to ~. Other notationa  for  this,  which we ahall refrain  from u.nng, 
                aZpZi 
           include DjD,f. Di.I.I;:wl' and /"1"/' When atill higher order derivatives  are 
           in question  certain  obvious abbreviations  are  used. For example 
                                     atl        meana  iz{ iy( iy( ~))). 
                          The  larp  number  of pcaible  higher  order  partial  derivatives  of  a 
                function ofll8VenI variables is much reduced by the cil'CUID8tance that the 
                order  of performing  the  partial  differentiations  is usually  irrelevant.  The 
                eimpleet cue of tbia is the equation 
                                                                              ~-~ 
                                                                                azB7I              a"az' 
                repeated  application  of which yields 
                                                                                ftI/        _          8'1 
                                                                           azaya.                  a.a,az 
                and aU eimil&r MUlte. Of COUl'8e lOme mild conditions  must be satisfied to 
                 parantee  thia irrelevance of order. The conditions in the following theorem 
                 are not the weak.t  known but are sufficient for all practical  purposes. We 
                 note that slightly  weaker conditions  have  already  appeared  in one of the 
                 exerciaee (Chapter VII,  Problem 36). 
                 Tlaeorem.  lAt I be G retJl..vcalued function Oft an open IUbeet 01 E" II&al ema-
                 .... "" poW G cand ,., i, j be GmotIf  I, ... , no II Cll)J cmd CI;): mil Oft our 
                 open __ cand en contin,"*, cat G then (JD}(G) - Clm(G). 
                           There  is nothing  to prove  if i ... j, 80 we may suppose i "j. Also all 
                 vanabl.  but Zi and Zi are held fixed in the various limit PIVC- by which 
                  we arrive  at  UDl(G) and  (JJ):(G), 80  we are  reduced  to  the  ~ n - 2. 
                  Therefore  we may suppose  that I is defined on a  certain  open  ball in HI 
                  of center G - (Gl, CIt) and that  CI~); and  (J;>~ exist on this ball and are con-
                  tinuous  at G  and  we must  prove  they  are  equal  at G.  We introduce  the 
                  function  4, given by 
                                           4(z)  _  I{zl, zi)  - I(zl,  CIt) - I(Gl,:e.)  + I(G" CIt) 
                                                                                     (Zl -       Ga) (St - CIt)                                   , 
                  defined at all  pointe Z - (ZI,:e.) of our ball of center  G for which Zl "  Ga, 
                  St "III-In the rest of the proof we restrict  oUl'IIelves to such  pointe  z.  If 
                  we set 
                  we have 
                                                                         4(z)  _  ,,(ZI, St) - .,(GI, :e.) 
                                                                                             (Zl - Ga) (St - CIt) 
                   Now the entire  line segment  in HI between  (Zl, zi)  and  (Gt, XI)  is in our 
                   open ball, 10 the mean value theorem  enabl.  us to write 
                                                       ,,(ZI,:e.)  -           .,(GI,:e.) -           (XI - sa).,:(Et, St) 
                   for some E. between GI and Zl. Therefore 
                                                    4(z)  _  .,aEl, Zr)  = laE" xi) -}J(El,-ai!_. 
                                                                        z. - tit                               .1:.  -    tit 
         SiDOe the entire  line JeIIIleIlt  in JlI between  (El, z.)  and (E1, as) ia in our 
         open ball and since by 888umption (f;>; ¢data in our ball, another  applica.-
         tion of the mean value theorem  gives 
                                          11(2:) ... (f~);(fl' EJ 
         for lOme tt between al and 4  That is 
                                         l1(z) -  (fm(fl,  tt) 
         for lOme fl between /11 and  Zl and  lOme tt between  lit and  2:1. Since (f~)~ 
         ia auumed  continuoUi at /I we deduce 
                                         lim l1(z) -   (fn;(a). 
                                         -
          But by the symmetry  of 11 thilllimit  ia independent  of the order of the  two 
          diiterentiatioDl.  (This  can also be proved  explicitly  by lOin,  through  the 
          IllUDe argument  88 above  with  ,,(Z1, 2:1) replaced  by ~(2:1, 2:.) - /(z"  2:.) -
         /(G"  2:.}.) That ie, we aIao have 
                                          lim 11(2:) - (f;>~(G). 
                                          -
               In the following theorem,  which ia a version of Taylor's  theorem  for 
          functions  of several  variables,  we ahall find it convenient  to use a uditter-
          ential  operator"  of the type 
                                  Cl~+~+ .. , +c..~, 
                                     8Z1        82:1               8z. 
          Here Ci, ' , " c.. E  R and for any real-valued  function /  on an open subset 
          of B- on which all the first partial  derivatives  ft, . , " I:' of-/  exist, we Bet 
          I     8                  8  \,        8/                 8/ 
          ,CI82:1 +  ' .. +  c.. 82:.JI- CI 8Z1  +  .. , +  c", ~ -        c~ + .. ' + c../.., 
          another  functiOD on the Bame open subeet of E·, Similarly if all the 8eCond 
          partial· derivatives  ~)i cxist on this open Bet we can define 
             (     8                  8  )1 
               CI-+"·+C.- / 
                  '*,                82:. 
                           - (Ci..!.. + ' .. + C...!..X(Cl..!.. + '"  + c...!.. \~), 
                                  h,                 b.          8Z1                 8z.JI, 
           Similarly  for  hilher  iterates  of  Cl-'- + .. , + c. -'-,  One  verifies 
                                                       hi                  82:. 
           immediately  the  explicit  relation 
                 Cl~ + ."  + c",--~)'/ =.              1:      ~.c. •. . 'c.. --- . ~'l __  ---. 
               ( hi                    8:1:..     .. ....... -1.......     a.l: •• (I.I: ••  ••  • aor •• 
             ..  IX. PAIft'IAL  DI""'UlI'I'I4ftON 
             TI&eerem.  Let U be an open subset of E- and let f:  U - R be a Jwu:tion 
             tJlZ of" partial derivGtirJel of order n + 1 aUt and are continuoua on U. 
             T1aen  if  a .. (a., •.. , a..),  b = (b., .•• , b.),  and  1M  entire  line  aegment 
             beCweM a aM b are in U there u.:iIU a point e on tAw line aegment auc1a tAat 
              I(b)  - f(a) + -M. «b. -a.) ,:.  + ... + (b. -a..) a!. )r )(a) 
                                   + ;1 «(b.-a.) ,:.  + ... + (b., - a..) ':')'f)(a)  + ... 
                                   + ~I«(b. - a.) 8:. + ... + (b. - a..) t!. Yf)(a) 
                                              1       ('                                                              a )"+1) 
                                  .+ (n + 1)1               (bs - a.) h.  + ... + (b., - a..) h.                                 f  (e). 
                     Define a map h: R - E- by 
                                         h(e) -       (a. + (b - a.)t, ... , a. + (b. - a..)C), 
                                                                   l 
             10 that  h is dift'erentiable, h(O) - a, h(l)  - b, and  h rnape [0,1]  onto  the 
             line aegment between a and b. Since U is open and contaiDl this line 1eI-
              ment,  the composite function f 0  h is defined on lOme open interval  in R 
              containing  [0, IJ.  The  function f  is dift'erentiable since it has  continuous 
              fint partial derivatives.  By the chain rule,!  0  h ii dift'erentiable and we have 
                                               • 
                         (Jo h)'(t)  -        I:Jf(h(t})(b,  - fJI) 
                                              '.1 
              or 
                              (J 0  A)' -     «(b. - Gi)-' + ... + (b. - a..)~ \~) 0 1&. 
                                                                   h.                                      az.~. 
              Repeating  this, for p  = 1, ... , n + 1 we get 
                            (J 0  h) (0)  -   «(b - a.)-'- + ... + (b. - a..)~)'f) 0 Ia. 
                                                      l 
                                                      .            az.                                     az. 
              By Taylor's  theorem 
                               (Joh)(l)  _  (Joh)(O) + (jola)'(O)  + ([oh)"(O)  + ... 
                                                                               11                    21 
                                                                          (j 0 h) (II' (0)         (j 0  A) (11+1)(1') 
                                                                   +            nl            +       (n+l)1 
              for IOnte r between 0 and 1. Hence the present  theorem,  withe  - A(E). 
                      The special case n = 0 is of particUlar importance  and is often called 
              the "mean value theorem for functioDl of several variables".  It states  that 
               there exists a point c on the line le(lMent between a and b such that 
                                                                  I a. IMPLICIT rvNC'I'IOIi  .....,....      _ 
                      I(b)  -/(a)  = (bl  -       a.)  al (c) + ... + (b. - ~(c). 
                                                       aZI                                  az.. 
           If we wish to prove only this special cue the proof is eepecia1ly auy: we 
           jUllt apply  the  ordinary  mean value  theorem  to the function 1(1a(t)). nul 
           proof shows that  in the present  lpecial cue the bypottu.ea  may be weak-
           ened IOmewhat, for all we need is that I be aontinuously  differentiable on 
           lOme open subset of E" that containl  all pointe of the line 1IfJIIMDt. between 
           CI  and  b, except  poesibly a and  b themselveI,  and  aontinUOUI on • lupr 
           let containing  a and b. 
                 RBIIABIt.       In  applications  of Taylor's  theorem  the _  U .. often  • 
           hall,  110  that  it  ill  lJR(·flll to  know  that  1M entire  line ..,..,  ..... ,., 
           pointe 01 E- ill contained in a given ball (open or cloI«l) if w ~ en 
           in  1M  ball.  I~or if  the  points  are  the  distinct  points  (/la, ••• , a.)  and 
           (b • • •• , b.)  and  the  l'enter  of  the  ball  is  (Ca. • ••• c..) then for  U17 'E R 
              l
            (d«a, + (bs - a.)t • ...• G,. + (b. - a.)t).  (Cl •••• , c.))1 
                                                                               • 
                                                                          - 1: ( .. + ('"  - .." - ee)l, 
                                                                              w 
           which  can  be  written  aCt - fJ)1 + 'Y  for  certain  a, fJ, 'Y E a, ell > 0, and 
           thil  clearly attains  its  maximum on any cloeed interval  of a at one of the 
           extremities. 
                                                   I S.  THE  IMPLICIT  FUNcnON  THEOREM. 
                  To  simplify  the  following exposition.  if  Z - (ZI, ••• , ~ E Bra and 
            11  - (YI, ••• , Y.) E E" we denote  by (z. y) the point  (ZI, ••• , %a, fl,  ••• t ,.) 
            EE-+-. 
            Theorem.          LeI. m, n be poaitive integer., CI E 8-. bEE-, and W/., •.. ,/. 
            be continuoua real-l'Cllued lunctiona on an open  BUbM of ...... ".., .... 
            1M point  (a, b).  tDitJ& II(a, b) ""  ...  -1.(0,  b) - O.  s.,...  ., /fir .. 
            i,j-I •... ,n 
                                        a/,(ZI, •.• , %a. ,.,  ••• , ,.)  _  ClC):'" 
                                                       lJfh 
            e~ and iB continuoua on 1M giMa open ..... and IIaGe de. X n ~ 
                                                    det( :: (a, b») 
            i. not uro. Then there eziBt open aubMB U C 8-, VeE-,  vilA a E U and 
            bE V,  auc1a  that  there  eziBt3  a  unique  furu:liqn  ,,: U -                     V  .....  IMt 
            I,{z. rp(z» - 0 lor eacI& i-I, ... , n  aM eacI& Z E U, and auc1 ., lAiB 
            lunction "  ill  continuoua. 
          _       IX.  P.urft4L  DlI'nBIIN'I'IA'I'IOIl 
                 The proof is a straightforward  generalization of that  previously given 
           for the special case '" ... ft  .. 1. We begin by defining real-valued functions 
           Fit ••• , F. on the same open subset of E-+- on whichla •..•• I. are defined 
           by 
                                                                • 
                                         F,{z, ,) - "  - I: Cel/(Z. ,), 
                                                               1-1 
           where (cClI,.I-I •...•• are certain  real numbers  to  be determined  in  such  a 
           manner that Fl •...• F. satisfy the following basic properties: 
                 (I)  each F, and each  ::  is continuous 
                 (2)  for each I - 1 •.. " ft.  F,(4, b) - b, 
                 (8)  for each I, i-I, ... 1ft  we·have  :: (4. b) .. 0 
                 (4)  for  any  z. JI  we have Ic(z, JI) - 0 for  i .. 1 ••.• I  n  if  and  only 
                       if  Fc(z. JI)  -   JI' for  i  -=  1. "'1 ft. 
                 Note that  properties  (1) and  (2) hold for any choice of the cils.  For 
           property  (3) to hold we need 
                                      •      III. 
                                     I: ~(41 b) - 6~,  I, k - 1 •.•.• ft 
                                     I_I     v,. 
           where ,~ is the Kronecker delta.  equal to 1 if i - k, 0 if i .. k. Those who 
           know linear algebra will see· in the last  equations  the statement  that  the 
           ft  X ft  matrix  (CII)  times  the  ft  X ft  matrix  (  :; (4. b») is  the  ft X ft 
           identity  matrix. 80 that  (CCI) is to be taken to be the inverae of the second 
            matrix. which indeed baa an invene  aince its determinant  is not MI'O.  But 
            the CCI'S may aIao be found in a more uelementary"  way by noting that for 
            any fixed I we get ft linear equations in the unknowns Cit. CII.  • ••• Cia and 
            we can solve these equations for Cit, CII,  ••• , Cia  provided the determinant 
            of the coefficients is not MI'O.  But this determinant  is that  obtained  from 
          . the  square  array  (  Z: (4, b») by  first  interchanging  rows and  colwnns, 
            and we know that this new determinant  baa the same value as the original 
            one, which wu given to be nonsero. Thus CiI'S may be found such that  (3) 
            holds. Aa  for  (4),  it  is  clear  that  if IC(z, JI) "" 0  for  i  "" 1, ... , ft  then 
            F.(z,JI)  -" for I - 1, ... ,ft.  To prove the  converse we must show that 
                • 
            if I: CulAZ, JI) - 0  for  1- 1, ... , ft,  then  II(Z, JI) .......  = , .. (z, JI) - O. 
               1-1 
            For those familiar with linear algebra, this is an immediate consequence of 
            the nonaingu1arit.y of the matrix (cu). Those who prefer to reason otherwise 
            may note that we can find Ua, ••• , u.. E  R such that 
                                                                ,3. IMPLICIT  PUIIC'l'ION  TRIIO....     lin 
                                 t  !!: (a, b)u" - !J(z, 1/),  j  ... 1, .•• , ft, 
                                  t-.l  """ 
          for  this  involves  IOlving a ayatem of ft  linear  equatiODB in ft  unknowos, 
          which is poIBible Bince the  ayatem of equatiODB baa DOuero determinant 
          det (  :r;. (a, b») j this enables ua to compute 
                               •                     •                           • 
                        o - 1: ~/1(z, 1/) -         1: ~ all (a, b)u .. -       1: ~u. = Uo, 
                              1-1                  1 •• -1  By"                 ,,-I 
           which in turn implies that  each /J(z, 1/) ... O. This completes the argument 
           that Cf/'8 can be found as desired, 80 that  we may take  for granted  in the 
           rest of the proof that  Fa, ..• , F. have  properties  (1)-(4). 
                 Chooee lOme r > 0 8uch that  the  open ball in E-+- of center  (a, b) 
           and radiua r is entirely  contained  in the open set on which la, ... , I. are 
           defined.  Since  each  aF JByI  is  continuoua  and  !:': (a, b) - 0  we  may 
           888um8 ,  taken 80 8mall that for each i, j  - 1, ... , ft we have I ::: I < i",1 
           at each  point  of the  ball.  We further  888ume r is 80 small that  the  con-
           tinuoua function det (  :           )  is nowhere zero on the ball,  this being po88ible 
           Bince this  determinant  is not zero at (a, b). Chooee AI 8uch that 0 < I: < r 
                                                                                        1 
           is true  and then  chooee A 8uch that  0 < A < ...; ,. - 11:                    and  8uch that 
           d«Fa(z, b), ••• , F.(z, b», b) < 1:/2 whenever z E E- and d(z, a)  < A, this 
           last  demand being juatifiable by the  continuity  of Fa, ••• , F •• We  8hall 
           prove the theorem  with  U the open ball  in E- of center  a and radiua A, 
           and V the open ball in E" of center b and radiua k. 
                 CoDBider any  fixed z E U. If " E E· and d(lI. b) S k we have 
           d«z, 1/), (a, b» ... «Zl  -         a.)1  +  ...  +  (z..  -       ca.)1 + <111  -      b.)1 
                                                                                 + ... + (1/. - b,.)1)1It 
                                 =  «d(z, 0»1 + (d<1l, b»l)lIl  < (hi + kl)lll  < r, 
           80  that  (z,1/)  is in our  ball  of radiU8 r.  If &lao 1/' E E" and  d<1l', b) S k, 
            then by the remark at the end of the last aection the entire line segment in 
            E" between 1/ and 11' is in the closed ball of center  b and radiua k. For our 
            fixed z,  each  F, is a differentiable  function  of the  last  ft  variables  OD  an 
           open 8Ubset of E" containing the latter closed ball. Thua for each i-I, . , ., ft, 
            the several-variable veraion of the mean value theorem (which immediately 
            follows the preceding theorem)  implies the existence of a point  11"  on the 
            line segment between 1/ and 1/' Buch that 
            F ~z, 1/) - F,(z, 11'> - <1Ia - Va) :: (z, 1/'') + .. . + (1/. - V.) :: (z, V')· 
          _       IX.  PAIl11AL  DlrFEIlEN11A110N 
          Thus 
           I F,(~, 1/) -  F,(x, 1/') I 
                           S 11/, - 11'11·1 ::: (X, 1/'') 1 + ... + 11/. -1/' .. 1'\ ::~ (X, 1/'') 1 
                              S _1_( 11/1 - 1/'11 + .. . + 11/ .. - 1/' .. I> 
                                  2ftl 
                              S  2~ max 111/1 - 1/',1, ... ,111ft - 1/'.11 
                              S  in d(1/, 1/'). 
           Therefore 
           d«FI(x,1/),  ... , Fft(x, y», (FI(x, 1/'), ... , Fft(x, y'») 
                            '""  «FI(x,  y)  ...:..  FI(x,  y'»'  + ... + (F .. (x, y)  -   F .. (x, y'»I)'" 
                            S (n . (d(~.,:") ),Y" S }iCY, y'). 
           Also 
           d«F,(x,  1/), . ", F .. (x, y», b) 
                                s d«F,(x,  y),  ••• , F .. (x, 1/», (Fl(x,  b), "', F.(x,  b») 
                                                                      + d«F,(x,  b), •.• , F .. (x, b», b) 
                                    1        .      k       k      k 
                                < j"d(y, b) + 2' S 2' + 2' ... le. 
           Thus  the  fixed  point  theorem  i,  applicable to  the  closed ball in  E" of 
            center b and  radius k  and  the  map which sends any 1/  in 'this ball into 
            (F,(x, 1/), ... , F .. (x, 1/». (Recall that  x is fixed.) Thi, giVel  us the existence 
            of a unique gEE" such that d(g, b) S k and F,(x, g) - g, for i-I, ... , ft, 
            that  is hex, fI) - 0 for i-I, ... , ft.  (Notice in fact  that  d(g, b) < k  by 
            the  last  inequality. That  is, 11 E  V.)  Since this  i8  valid for each x E  U 
            we can define our function I{I:  U -              V  by l{I(x) =- 11,  and  to complete the 
                    it remains only to prove that I{I is continuous. 
            proof 
                  The continuity of I{I can be deduced from what has already been proved. 
            To prove I{I  continuou8 at some a' E  U, for any • > 0 consider the aame 
            problem as in  the statement  of the  theorem of this section, with  (a, b) 
            replaced by (a',  b,), where b' -          l{I(a'), and each!. replaced by ita restriction 
            to the open subset of E'"+" given by                             . 
                                I (x, 1/) E Ewa+" : ~ E U,1/ E V, d(1/, b') < .t· 
            Note that  our choice of r above guarantees that  det(  :£ (a', b'»  ~ 0, 
                                                               13.  IMPLICIT  J'UNC'I10N  TaIlORSM     109 
           80  all the  analogs of the  original hypotheses hold. Analogous to  U, V, II' 
           we obtain  V',  V', 11", where U' and V' are open subsets of U and V respec-
           tively and 11"  is a function 11": U' -        V' such that for each :e E U we have 
                                                                                               ' 
          "(x,tp'(x»  = ...  = f.(x,  tp'(x»  = 0  and  d(tp'(x),  b')  < t.  By  the  unique-
           ne1!8  property  of  II'  we  get  that  tp(x) ==  tp'(x)  for  all  x E U'.  Therefore 
           d(tp(x),tp(a'»    < e if x E  U'.  Hence II' is continuous at a'.  Since a' W88 an 
           arbitrary  point of V, the function II' is continuous. 
           Corollary  I.      If th~ hypotheses oj the theorem are Itrengthened by the aaump-
           tion  that fl, ... , f.  are continuously  differentiable  on the given open aubaet 0/ 
           E ...... ·,  then  U,  V  may  be chosen so that II' is continuoulJly differenti4ble. 
                 We first show that  if U and  V are chosen suitably  then II' is differen-
           tiable. First choose V and  Vas in the conclusion of the theorem. Then the 
           continuous function on  V  whoae value at x  is det (  Z: (x, tp(x»)  ie not 
           zero at a, therefore nowhere zero in some open ball in E- of center a. It 
          . therefore suffices to prove that  II' is differentiable at any  point  x E  U at 
           which this determinant  is not zero. Hence it sufficee to prove"  differen-
           tiable  at a,  under  no further  conditions than  those given in the  theorem 
           and corollary. Now each point of E·e ....... ) may be considered an .tuple  of 
           points of E-+·,  the  coordinates of the  first point of E-+" being the  fint 
           (m + n) coordinates of the point of E·e ....... ), the coordinates of the .econd 
           point of E"+· being the second (m + n) coordinates of the point of E"e-" 
           etc. Consider the subset of E"e,.+ .. ) consisting of all pointe (Zl,  ••• , 1") such 
           that  each z, is a point of the open subset of E-+" on which / ..... ,/ .. are 
           defined. We have a ('ontinuous function on  this subset  of E"(-"+'"  whose 
           value  at  (Zl,  ••. , , .. )  is  det (  :~: ("») and  this  function  is  not  sero  at 
           «a, b), (a, b),  ... , (a, b»,  hence not  zero if Zl,  ••• , I"  are  all  sufficiently 
           near (a, b). Thus  by restricting  the set on which /.,  ... ,/ .. are defined we 
           may assume that  for any Zl,  ••• ,," in this set we have det(  :~; (I'») ~ o. 
           Let V, V be as in the conclusion of the theorem. Without 1088 of &enerality 
           we may assume that V, V are open balls in E-, E" respectively, with centers 
           a, b respectively, for otherwise V may be replaced by an open ball of center b 
           that is entirely contained in V and  U replaced by any open ball of center a 
           of  sufficiently  small  radius.  The  set  of  pointe  I (x, y) E  E-+":  x E  U, 
           11  E  VI  has the  property  that  it contains the entire  line segment between 
           any  of ita points  and  (a, b). Write  II' -         (tpa,  •. • ,11'.) where  each  tpi  is  a 
           real-valued function on U, so that  for any x E  U we have  tp(x) - (tpa(x) , 
            ... ,tp,,(x».  For each i= 1, ... ,nandanyxE  Uwehaveji(x,tp(X»                           ... 0, 
           80 by the several-variable version of the mean value theorem 
         110   Dt.  PAItI'IAL DI~'l'IOIl 
                o - I~s, .,(s»  - 1,(0, ,,(0» 
                          -   aI, (-?(ss - os) +  "  . +  ~(-?(s. - 0.) 
                             as                           as. 
                                l 
                          +~(I')(9'l(s) -bs)  +  •..  +~(-?(.,.(s) -b.) 
                             'Ill                             III. 
         for IODle  .. on  the line  IeIJDeIlt  between (s, .,(s»  and  (0, b). For  eaoh 
         s E U we cboaee speci60 ", ••• , ,.. Since det (  :       (-? )  ,. 0, the I)'8tem 
         offtequatioDa 
                 :. (I')(",(s)  - bs) + ... + :. (-?(.,.(s)  - b.) 
                              -  -~(I')(s, - os) - ...  -        'I, (-?(s.  - a..) 
                                    Is.                          as. 
         eanbeeo1vedfor9'l(s)  -bs,  ... ,,,,,(s)  -b.. Weget,foreachi.:-        i, ... ,ft, 
         ".(s)  -  b, - AQ(S)(SI, - as} +  A,..(z)(Zs - as) +  •..  +  A .. (s)(s.  - 0.), 
         where IICh A~s) ill the  quotient  by  det( !! (-?)  of a apecific pol,.-
         nomial expreIIion in the various partial derivativ.  of II, ... , I. evaluated 
         at various pointe ", ••• , ... Since lim .' -   (0, b) for i-I, ••• I  ft and the 
                                                    -
         partial  derivativ.  of  I., ... , I.  were IllUmed  continuous,  the varioUi 
          All'.  are  continuoua at Go  The lemma of ,1 implies that  ".,  ... , "" are 
          differentiable M  Go  '11lUl "  ia differentiable at 0, and  we have completed 
          the proof that"  is diffenmtiable for auitabb' choIen U,V. 
               Havinl proved "  ditrerentiable, it is eM7 fA) see how to compute the 
          YUioua partial derivativ.  *. We appI,. the chain rule fA) the equations 
          to_                  f,(s., ... , .... 9'l(s), ••• , ".(s»  - 0 
               :£ (s, ,,(s»  +  :. (s, .,(s»  :::  + ... +  Z: (s, .,(s»  ~ - 0 
          (equivalently,  for anyone likely to be confuaed by the a notation, 
          (f.)~s,.,(s» + (f')':"'l(S,.,(S»(.,s}J(s) + ... +  (fi)~(S,,,(s»(,,,,)J(s) - 0). 
          For an,.  6xed j  and varyinc  i we pt a ayatem of ft linear equations in the 
          ft  unknowns  "", ••• ,  ''''',  the  determinant  of  this  ayatem  being 
                           1st         'SI 
          det (  %: (s, .,(s» )  ,. O. Thus we can solve explicitly for the various __ • 
          In dolDc thia we _  the delired information that  under the conditions of 
          the 00I0llarJ IICh '"e/Isl is continuous on U, and this completes the proof. 
                                                                • 3.  IMPLICIT  ruNC'ftON  TBIIOUIl     211 
           COrollary  2 (InHraeJunetion  theorem).                     Let g ... (gl, ••. , gil) be a con-
           tin1l.OUBly differentiable ,'Unction Irom an open subset 01 Ea which containa tM 
           point b into Ea, each g. being a real-val'UBd l'Unction on thia open subset, and 
           auppose 
           (that  ia, det (  :; (b») -,I: 0).  Then there exist open aubseU U, V of E-, with 
           be V, such that g ia  defined at each point of V and tM restriction 0/ g to V 
           ia a one-one map 0/ V onto U whose inverse l'Unction g-I: U -+ V is contin",-
           O1J.8l1l diJ! erentiable. 
                 On  the  open  subset  of  }JIll  consisting  of  aU  points  (x,1/)  such  that 
           z E Ea and 1/ is in the open subset of E" on which g is defined, we define 
           functions /1, ... ,III by 
                                              I.(z, y) - z, - g.(y). 
           Set a - g(b).  Applying  Corollary  1 to 11, ••. , I. and  the  point  (a, b),  we 
           get  open  subeeta  U ,  V1  of Ea,  with  a E  Ul  and  be VI, such  that  there 
                                     1
           exists a unique  function  tp:  Ul -         VI such that  z - g(tp(z»  for all z E Ul 
           and  tp is continuously  difterentiable.  The  map  tp is one-one from  U1onto 
           tp(U.) - g-I(U.)  fl VI' By  the  first proposition  of Chapter  IV, g-I(U I)  is 
           an open subset of the set on which g is defined, hence an open subset of E-. 
           Therefore  tp(U.)  is an  open  subset  of Ea.  If we set  U =  Ul, V = ,p(U ), 
                                                                                                          1
            then  the  restriction  of g to  V is one-one onto  U; furthermore  the inverse 
           function  g-l:  U _  V is just  tp,  which is continuously  differentiable. 
                  The determinant  det «g,):) - det(  Z; ) is called the jacobian deter-
            minant (or jacobian) of g.  It is frequently  denoted 
                                              a(gl; ..• , gil)    or  J,. 
                                              a(1/1, ••• , y.) 
                  The  inverse  function  theorem  implies  that,  if  9  is a  continuously 
            difterentiable  function  from a connected open subset  W of Ea into  E" and 
            the jacobian of g is nowhere zero, then g(W)  is a connected open subset of 
            Ea and g is one-one on some open ball centered  at any given point of W. 
            However, 9 need not be one-one on all of W. If n - 1, g is indeed one-one 
            on all of W, for then  the jacobian g' is either positive or negative  on all of 
            W, SO that 9 is either strictly  increasing or strictly  decreasing. But if n ... 2 
            the "polar  coordinate  map,"  which sends any  (r,8)  E» such that  r > 0 
            into  the point  (r COB (J, ,. ain 8), is not one-one, although  it is one-one if (J  is 
            restricted  to any open interval  in R of length  211". 
           III     IX.  PABTIA.L DlrntlIlNTlA.TlON 
           PROBLEMS 
            1.  Show that the function I: B' -+ R given by 
                                                      lsl~IYI  if (s, y),.  (0,0) 
                                       I(s, y)  -  {      o        if (s, y)  -  (0, 0) 
                is continuous.  Where is it dilYerentiableT 
            2.  For  which  real  numbers  a > 0  is  the  function  I: B' ..... R  that  is  given  by 
                I(s, r) -   (:cI + yI)- dllYerentiableT 
            3.  Show that if I is a real-valued  function  on a connected  open subset  of 8" and 
                fa -I: - ...  -/~ - 0 then I i8 constant. 
            4.  Let I be a dilYerentiable real-valued  function  on the  open ball in B" of center 
                 (01, •.. ,0.)  and  radiu8 ,  and  suppose that I~ - allaz,. - O. Prove  that  there 
                is  a  unique  real-valued  function  ,  on  the  open  ball  in  B-1  of  center 
                 (01, ••• , G.-I)  and  radiu8 ,  such  that I(zl,  ... , z") - ,(Zl,  ••. , S .... I), and  tbiI 
                ,  is dilYeren tiable. 
            6.  Let I be a  real-valued  function  on  an  open  subset  U of 8".  Prove  that I is 
                continuously  dilJerentiable  if and  only  if there  exist  continuous  real-valued 
                functions  AI, ... , A .. on the set 
                       I (Sl •••• , Z., y.,  ...• 11.) E B'" : (Zl, ••• , ~). (rl,  •••• 11.) E  UI 
                 such that 
                          I(s) -1M - AI(s.1IHzl - 11.) + ... + A.(z, 1IHs. - f.) 
                 for all s. " E U. 
            6.  Let U be an open subset  of R, let a, 11: U -+ R be  dilYerentiable functions.  let 
                 V be an open subset of B' that for each 11 E  U contains  the entire  line segment 
                 between  the points  (a(y), y) and  (11M, y), and  let J: V -+ R be a continuous 
                 function  such that  allay exists and is continuous.  Prove  that  if F: U -+ R is 
                 defined by 
                                                             ~·' 
                                                F(y)  =-    .c.l  I(s, y) dx, 
                                                          1
                 then             i_c., ~ 
                       F'(1I)  -    .C.'  ay (x, 11) dx + 1({J(1/), y) fJ'(II)  -/(a(y),  11) a'M· 
             7.  Let  V, W be normed  vector  spaces  (Prob.  22, Chap.  1I1), let  U be an open 
                 subset of V, and let a E  U. Call a function I: U ..... W diff"",iable  oh if there 
                 exists  a  continuous  linear  transformation  (Prob.  22,  Chap.  IV)  T: V -+ W 
                 such that 
                                           •  III(z)  -/(a)  - T(z - 0)11          0 
                                          I
                                          ~               liz-ali               -   . 
                  (a)  Prove  that  if I is diIJerentiable  at a, then  T is unique  (80 that  we may 
                       write T -1'(0.),  generaliaing ~t was done in the Iaat paracraph  of ,  1). 
                                                                                                     no .....         m 
                  (b)  Prove that if I i. differentiable at 0 thea I ill continuouut  .. 
                 (c)  Prove that if W - B" Ulan I ill differentiable at 0  if &Del oaI7 II the ~ 
                        pone1lt fUDctioDl of I are differentiable at o. 
                  (d)  Prove the  following pneraliatioD  of  the  cbaiD rule: U V,  W, Z are 
                        normed vector apaceI,  if U and U' are opeD .. bIeta of V aDd W n.peo-
                        tively, and if I: U .... U' I. dilerentiable  at the poiDt 0  e U aad ,: U''''' Z 
                        ill differentiable at I(a),  thea ,oils  differentiable at 0  &Del c,. n' -
                        ,'(1(0» 1'(0). 
             8.  Verily that  if ",1/1: R .... R are twice dilerentiabl.  fUDCtiou, II a e ., aDd II 
                 I(z, JI)  -   ,,(z -  aJl) + I/I(z + aJl) lor all (z, JI) e /lI,  theD 
                                                            ~  ~ 
                                                           a1/' - o'ax" 
             9.  Verily that  the  function  u(z, JI) - ,-""'/ v'i .tisfi.  the differential equa-
                  tion 
                                                             ,..     h 
                                                             aza-",. 
                  Do the .me for the funetion  /.' I(t),-c-"II-v-mtll,                      where I., b) is a  cloeecl 
                  interval in R and I: (a, b) .... R ill continuoue. 
            10.  Show that if f il! a contiDuoully differentiable. real-valued 'unction  on all opeD 
                  interval  iD  B' and iJll/aza, - 0. then  there  are  contiDUOUIly dil .... tiabIe 
                  real-valued functioDl fa, I, on open intervall  iD R IUCh that 
                                                   I(z, r) - fa(z) + Ih). 
            11.  Prove that  if U II! an open ball in B" ad I .. .. . 1.: U -                    R are contiDUOUIlJ 
                  differentiable functions such that 
                                                             Ph.      Ni 
                                                             aXI -    aZ, 
                  lor  all  i,J - I,  ... , ft,  then  tbere  exiI!tI a  Iunction  ,: U .... R  IUoh  that 
                  fl  - aF/az, lor i-I, ... , R.  (iii"': If (alt ... , a.)  il t.he can_  of the  ball, 
                  try defining /t' by 
                     F(z .. ... , z.)  =  J: f.(I, fit,  •.• , a.) dt + J: I,(za, t, fit,  ••• , oJ ", 
                       + J: I.(z .. ZI, ',at,  ... , a.) dt + ... + J:: I.(z" ... , z-a, " ",.) 
            12.  Show that the funet.ion I: B' .... R liven by 
                                                           ~. 
                                           fez, r) _  za +,. II (z, r) ,. (0,0) 
                                                         {
                                                               o       if (z,,)  -    (0,0) 
                  ill continuously differentiable and has all ita eecoad orda- partial cla+fUivee, 
                  but that 
                                                   ~  ~ 
                                                   aza, (0,0)  ,. ~ (0,0). 
            lit      IlL  P.&II'IUL  DlI'nUIftt&'I'ION 
            13.  I& I be a rea1-valued fwactioD OD an open aubeet of ]II containiog the point 
                   (Ga, lit, ae>. Buppoee that I poeaeeaee all ita t.bird order partial derivatives and 
                   that  these are continuous. Compute 
                                      lim          (ZI -Ga)-I(ZI  - 1It)-I(ZI - 1It)-I(/(zl,  ZI, Za) 
                              eq. ... .., .. , ...... .., 
                                                    -/(Ga, %to Zt) -/(zl, lit, Za) - /(ZI,  ZI, Ge) 
                                                    + /(Sa, lit, Ge) + I(AI, ZI, Ge) + /(AI, lit, Za) 
                                                    - I(Ga, lit, ae». 
             14.  (a)  Ullina the  notation of the  theorem "vine the chain rule and 88IUIDinI 
                          that  II,  ••• .!.  and ,  have contlnuOUl I8CODd order partial derlvativea, 
                                  out the expreeaiOD for (c, 0  I>i)~. 
                          work 
                   (b)  U. part. (a)  to  expreea the  laplacian :: + :: in polar coordinates. 
                          (Here 
                                   11 -  ,,0 I, where I(s, r) - (', I) - ( V zI + "., tan-I 'IJ/z), and the 
                          Laplaciau is to be expreeaed in terma of the partial derivatives of ,  with 
                          respect to ,  and I.) 
             16.  Write down aplicitly  all terms of the multivariable Taylor formula if m - 3 
                   and "  - 2, ooUeotins t.erma topther  wherever poIBible. 
             18.  I& U be All opeo aubeet of gr.,/: U -t R a differentiable function. Prove that 
                    if I attains a maximum or a minimum at the point 0 E U, then/{(o)  - ...  -
                   I~(A) - O. Prove conveneiy that if / has all ita aecooo order partial  derivativea 
                    continU0U8 at A and /((o)  -            •••  - /I.(A) - 0, then the restriction of /  to lOme 
                    open ball of center 0  attains a maximum at 0  if the "  X" symmetric matrix 
                    ( <ffli<A»  is Deptive  definite and  attains  a  minimum at  A  if thia matrix i8 
                    poeitive definite, while I does not attain  either a maximum or a minimum at 
                    o if tbia matrix is neither poeitiv. nor neptive  aemidefinite. 
             17.  Prove that if the functiolll/I,  ••• ,/. in the etatement of the implicit function 
                    theorem are aeaumed to be A: timea continUOUlly differentiable (i.e., all partial 
                    derivatives of order A: exist and are continuous), then the lI&IIle is true of the 
                                                              .,. of fl. 
                    component functiona .,., ••• , 
              18.  (a>  Compute B(z, r)/B("  I) if z - , COl I, r  - , sin I. 
                    (b)  Compute  B(:I, r, .)/B("  I,,,)  if  z - , COB I sin 'P,  7J - , sin I sin ", and 
                          .-,coa". 
              19.  "If I(z, r,')  - 0, then               8 •• !!r. • 8z _  -1 II 
                                                          arBzB'                    . 
                    Make BeD8e out of thia nODBeD8e and prove. 
              20.  Let 8 be a cloaed IUbeet of gr. which contains the entire line segment between 
                    any  two of ita pointa and let I be a continuoUllly differentiable map from an 
                    open aubeet of gr. containing 8 into gr.. Suppoae that /(8)  C 8 and that  there 
                     is a real Dumber A: < 1 IUch that 
                                                           i; «/j)j(Z»1  S I: 
                                                           '.1-1 
                    for all Z E 8. Prov.  that  the restriction of / to 8 is a contraction map, 80 that 
                     the flxecl point theorem is applicable. (Hi"':  You may want to use Prob. 20, 
                     Chap. VI.) 
     CHAPTER  X 
     Multiple Integrals 
                    In our treatment of one-variable intepation  we 
                 were ~ concerned with continUOUl funetioaa. .. 
                 Step functioaa appeared in  the  proofs, but  their WIe" 
                 W1III  an  euUy  avoidable  f.4lchnical device. In  multi-
                 variable  integration  we  are of COUI'II8 still  primarily 
                 intereated  in  continuous  functiona,  but  the  neceity 
                 for  intepatinl  over  fiIurea with  curved  boundaries 
                 foreea us to ccmaider fairly pnenl noncontinuous func-
                 tions. In this ohapter  we .tart  with a atraiptforward 
                 mimickinl of what was previously done for one variable. 
                 At a certain point the need for pnera1ity  entaila lOme 
                 apecial consideration of leta of volume aero, but  this 
                 hurdle  is  quickly  pueed.  We  end  up  with  .trongel' 
                 reaulta than before for the one-variable caae, in addition 
                 to all the eBI8Iltial speci&cally multidimeuaional etate-
                 menta. 
              116        X.  1IV1/lDL1I11IftGa&LB 
                           11.  1UEMANN INTEGRATION ON A CLOSED INTERVAL IN P. 
                                                                              EXAMPLES AND BASIC PROPERTIES. 
                       Recall that a closed interval  in E- ia a aublet 01 E- 01 the lorm 
                                {(2:I, ••• , z,.) E E- : G, S 2:, S bcfor each i-I, ... , tal, 
               where  (II,  ••• , a..,  ba, ••• , b.  are  fixed  real  numbera  IUch  that  GI  <  ba, 
               •.• , a.. <  b,.;  we call thia  closed interval  the  cloHtl i1&IenHJl .,..".irUJtl  ", 
               (II,  ••• t  a.., ba, ••• , b. and  we note  that  the  numben  Gl,  ••• , a.., ba, ••• , b,. 
               are  themaelves  determined  by  the  closed  interval.  The  notion  of  an 
               opeb  interval  in  E- il  obtained  in  a  limilar  manner  by  replaciDl  each 
               Iymhol  S  by the aymhol  <. 
               Dfdira'doJu. Let  (II,  ••• , a.., ba, ••• , b. E R,  with  (II  < b ,  ••• , a.. < b •• 
                                                                                                                                l
               By  a  partition  0/  the  cloaed i1&lervtJl 1 C E"  determined  by  GI,  ••• , a.., 
               ba,  ••• , b. we mean an n-tuple  of partitioDl  of the closed intervale  [Gl,  bal, 
                ••. , [a.., b,.) in R, that iI, an ordered set of n finite aequencea of real numben 
                           1      1                                    1                       N1
               (2:1',2:1,2:1 ,  ••• ,  2:1NI), (2:1°,2:1,2:-/,  ••• , 2It                         ),  ••• ,  (z,.o, z,.1, z,.',  ••• , z,.N.) 
               (where  the  IUpencriptAI are  indicea,  not  exponente)  aueh  that  for  each 
               i-I, ... , n we have 
                                                  (I,  -   2:' < 2:1 < 2:1 <  •.•  <  2:~' - b,. 
                Th. tDidIA 01 this partition  ia defined to b. 
                                     max (2:1- 2:rl :  i .. 1, •.• ,ta and  i-I, ... , N,I. 
                If / ia a real-valued function on 1, by a RiemtJtata IUm /or / corrupon.di,.,  to 
                the given partitiota we mean a aum 
                                 1:           .  /(111"""·, ••• , '1/./.'''1.) (2:J!' -                   2:l/rl)  •••  (z,./.  -           z,./.-I), 
                I.-I ••••• N,; ••• ;I.-I ••••• N. 
                                                                 1
                where each '1//1"'1. E  [2:10, 2:/1). We ... y  that /  ia Ricmman inlegrtJble Oft 1 
               if there  exilts  a number  A E  R lueh  that,  given any  f  > 0, there exists a 
                6> 0 lueh  that  18 - A 1< f  whenever 8.ia  any Riemann  lum  for /  cor-
                responding to any partition  of 1 of width Iell than '; in this cue A ia called 
               the Rimumta intflgrtJl all Oft 1 (or over 1), and ia denoted  /'/. 
                        Note  that  il  n - 1  we  have  exactly  what  we bad  in  Chapter  VI, 
                except for a Blight change of notation.  For ta > 1 we have an immediate 
                generalization of what  waS done earlier. The ahove partition  of the closed 
                interval  1 in B" lubdivides  1 into N"N I  ... N.  closed aubintervala  no two 
                of which overlap, except poBBibly at extremitiea, that is points (2:1, ••• , z,.) 
                                                                      11. BlallAHN  IlITIIG&\ftON  .. II-           D'r 
                                                        b, 
                                                   ","  ------------~-,--,-~ 
                                                                                                         1
                                     "  "  "            .,                          ,,/ r--r-- ;'1 
                                *,,'                   ",'  ------;..,.!---,-t  -"'--,;l-~ 
                           --"'- -- ----r'--
                         ... -.                 ,                                                            " 
                  "f'  I                   ,.'                                                             , . 
                                                                             ti3!~ I. 
                r-~-;~-- -;; ... - ----                                                                   I    • 
                I    ,to     I      ,.                              fG                                   I     I 
                ,,'  I       I  ,,"                                 f-1~~t==I~QI'  : 
                I      :   .-¥----------                                                                       I 
                I     ,,"  I 
                I  ,.'       I                                                                                 , 
                .... ---,-------------!'-. -r'--- ..... Ii--f                                                  • 
                             I                                                                                 I 
                             I                                                            I        I 
                             I                                                           I         I 
                             I                                                          I          I 
                             I                                                         I 
                             I                                                       I             I 
                           1/1 
                             I                                                    I                I 
                             I                                                  I                  I 
                             l                                      I,'                            I  ,I 
                                --------------~--~--~----T~-I 
                                                                     I    I        I                I  ' 
                                                                     : ,~--I----f-TI 
                    _____________ __ ..L __ -' ____ J __ J 
                                                                     II         I            ,I' 
            FrouD 34.  A partition  01 •  eIeIed interftl  III .. iIacIuca ... bcItriIioa Into ... 
                           IlUblntervale no two 01 which 0YWIap. eIIIIIPt poIIibI7  M extr ...... 
           eueh that:l:i  ... :1:1 for some i,j, &8 is illuetrated in Figure M. For. Riemann 
           eum corresponding  to a specific partition,  the  varioua pointa <r~ .. -I., .•. , 
            y .. /, ... J.)  are  obtained  by  choosing one  point  from each  01 the cloeed aub-
                                                        /
            intervale.  The  expl'ell8ion (:1:1 , - !l:l/,-1)  •••  (:e,.J. -            z..~) NpNI8Dta  the 
            "volume"  of a eubinterval.  (Cf. Figure 35.)                                                           . 
                  The  Riemann  integral  of J on 1, if it ata,  ie unique:  If A, A' are 
            Riemann  integrale  of J on 1, then  for  each  t  > 0 there  exiatI •  number 
            ., > 0 euch that if 8 is any Riemann sum for J eorrespondilll  to • partition 
            of 1 of wid th Ieee than  ,  (such partitions  axial. I)  then  we have 18 - A I, 
            IS - A'l < e, &8 a eoneequenee of which  IA - A'l < 2e, and linee t.his is 
            true for each e > 0 we muet have A - A'. 
                 There are numerooa alternate  notations  for  /,f. In the case n =  1, 
           we have already denoted k .. 1 by  J.' f(z) dx. For n > 1, /,f is sometimes 
           written 
                                 /rfdx,  or /rf(z)d(:r:),  or /rfdx1'"  d:r:". 
           Sometimee " integral signs are used, 88 in 
                                J /r I(z. II) d:r: d"    or  J f /r I(z. II. a) d:r: d" dz. 
                  M in the cue n - 1, we shall abbreviate  the expreeeions "Riemann 
           intepable"        and  "Riemann  integral"  to  "integrable"  and  "integral" 
           reepective1y. The  comments made at  the  end of  '1  of Cbapter  VI  are 
           apropos here. In particular, since there are other  methods of integration 
           than that  of Riemann. care moat be exercised in coUating the results of 
           thia chapter with results in other texts. 
            FlQVU 81. EIamp_ 01 RiemaDa auUIL If the function I on the liven clOled Interval I 
                           In IfI .... the value 1 a' each polnt 011 or within the indicated oval and the 
                           value IeI'O '" all otlaer pointe oil then lIllY RIemann eum lor I COITeIpoDdinc 
                           w the Indicated partlUon 01 I  ill the  IUID 01  the  areaa or certain or the 
                           reo ......  Inw wblch I  illaubdividecl. Which rectanalet are w be lncluded 
                           la the ... depeadI 011 how the pointe (,.,,/a,  "",/a) are choMA. For differat 
                           ahoioeI 01 u-e  pointe the  un.haded  rectanalet are never  Included, the 
                           liPU7 Ihaded reetaIlalet may  or  may  not  be  lncluded,  and  the  darkly 
                           ..... rectancl-are alway. Included. 
                                                                              11. IllDANN  .lITIIOII&ftON  .N ..                119 
                    EulO'LJI  1.  If I  is as above  and /(s.,  ... , Sa) - e, a conatp.nt, for 
             all  (s.,  ... , Sa) E  I,  then  for any  partition  of I,  say  the  partition  in  the 
             above definition, we have 
                           I:               /("./1 .. 04, ••• , "il···I.)(st        l -   Sll-I)  ... (Sal. - s.I.-') 
             11-1 ..... NI; ... ;Ia-I ..... N. 
                                                                                1                            I
                         -                I:               e(sll  - %./1- )  •••  (%01. -            Sal.- ) 
                           i.-l, .... Na: ... ;J.-l ..... N. 
                                  NI                                     ~ 
                                                          I                                   /   I
                         - ,./ I: (%./1  -         S.il- ») ... ( L  (Sal. - Sa .- ») 
                             '11-1                                      1.-1 
                         -   e(ht - at} ••• (b. - a.). 
             Since all Riemann  8UJD1 equal e(b. - at} •••  (h. - a.),  we have a function 
             that is integrable  on 1 and 
                                                      f,e = e(hl - al) ••. (h. - a.). 
                     EXAMPLil  2.  Let 1 be as above, let  E. E (a., haJ, and let I: 1 -                                      R be 
             a  bounded  function  such  that  1(%., .•• , :ta)  = 0  if  %. pi! E ••. Suppose 
              I/(z., ... , % .. ) ISM for  all  (s., ... , Sa) E 1.  Consider  the  partition  of  I 
              appearing  in the  definition, 8Upposed to be of width  lellll than  a, and  the 
                                                                                        /, 
              Riemann lum in the definition. We have 1(111 ... 1., ••• , ",,/1"'1.)  - 0  unlfJIII 
              1/./1'''1. -   EI, which can be true  for at mOlt two diltinct  NI, 10 that 
                                                     /                                                                          I
              I               I:               1(,11 , .. 04,  ••• , " .. /1"'1.) (%1/1 -   Sl/,-I)  •••  (z,,1. -       Sal.- ) I 
                II-l ..... NlI ... ;Ia - ••••.• N.                                      . 
                                                                           1            I                            I
                          S                I:               2 M a(%s1 - :tsI..-) ... (Sal. - Sal.- ) 
                             h-I, .... N.; .•. ;;.-I ..... N. 
                                           ~                                      N. 
                          -2 M a( 'r' (:.:sia - %..-1») ... ( I: (Sal. - Sal.-I») 
                                          h-I                  .                1,,-1 
                          - 2M I(bs - a,) ••• (h .. - CIa). 
               Clearly  /,1-o.  More  genera1ly,  /,1'" 0  for  any  bounded  function 
              I: 1 -      R for  which  there  exists some i  ... I,  ... , Il  and  some  Ei E  (ai, hi] 
               luch  that I(sl,  ... , z.)  = 0 if %i pi! f,. 
                      EUMPLII  3.  Let 1 be as above, and  let ai,  ... , a., fll, ... , fl. E 8, 
               with  a. S ai < fli S b for i-I, ... , n. Define I: 1- 8  by 
                                                   i 
                                                               if %i E (ai, fl,) for each i-I, ... , n 
                             1<-' ...... ) - {:  if (%1, ... , z.) Eland  %i e (a"  fl,) 
                                                                                   for  Borne i-I, ... ,n. 
                                                       1          NI
           CoDllider the  partition  (SID, SI , ... , SI ), ... , (z.',  z.I,  ... , Z.N.)  of  I, 
           suppoeed of width  I...  than  "  and  a  corresponding  Riemann  sum 
                 8 -               1:             I(Ytla"·I.,  •• ',1/.Ia"·I.)  (si'  -  Stlrt)  ••. 
                       11.1 ..... Na; ••• iI-~l ..... N.                                    (z.1. -   S.I.-I), 
                                                                                                           1
           where ,1&"'1. E (ZFI, sic] for  all  i, i., ... , i.. Since I(,"·"A., ... , 1I. .. .J.) 
                                                                                                             , 
                                                              1a               1
                                                                                , 
           ie 1 or 0, according  as the  point  (1II ···I., .•• , 11. ... 1.) i. or  it  not. in  the 
           open lubinterv&l of I determined  by orl, ••• , «., fJI, ••• , {J., we have 
                                 8 -      1:. (s"  - S,,-I)  •.. (z.1. - z.1.-') , 
                                        11 .... ,/0           . 
           the  aateriak indicating  that  we  include  only  thoee i., ... , i.  for  which 
              /, 
           111 ... 1. E (or., fJi), ••• ,1/,.1, ... 1. E  (or., (J.).  For  i-I,  ... , ",  ohooae  p., ,. 
           from &rnOIlIl, 2, •• " N. 80 that 
                                     si'rl  ~ or. < si",  s~rl < fJ. ~ S~'. 
           Then  ,1&"'1. E  (or., fJi)  if  p. + 1 ~ i. ~ ,. - 1  and  ,i'''.J.  E (or., fJ,)  if 
           i. < p. or i. ~ , •. Therefore 
                                 1:                   (Slla - S,,-I)  ..• (z.1. - z.1.-1) ~ 8 
                .. +ls11 S" -11 ...... +1 sl-S .. -I 
                                             ~            1:            (sal' - s./r1 ••• (%al. - %ala-I) 
                                                                                         ) 
           or                                   .. S/, SIl; ... I1IIoSI-S .. 
               ,,-I                                  ..-1 
            (  1:  (s.l,  - Sl/rl»  ... (  1:  (z.1. - z.1.-1»  ~ 8 
             1,-.. +1                             1.-.. +1 
                                                        II                                ,-
                                                 ~ ( 1: (s.1a - S~-I»  ... (  1: (%al. - %al.-I) ). 
                                                      h-..                              1.-.. 
            By the choice of p. and qi we have fJ. - or, ~ s~, - sjlrl  < (q, - p. + I)', 
            10 that we muat have qi - 1 ~ P. + 1 fori  -                    I,  ... , nif I iel ... than each 
            (fJ. -  a.}/2.  in which case the last inequalitiea become 
            (Slrl - s ... )  ... (z.,.-I  - s."")  ~ 8  ~ (Sl"  - S ... -I)  •..  (%a"  -                 S.",,-I). 
            Since our partition  has width  I .. than  I, for each i-I, ... , n we have 
                or, -   I  < Si'rl < si" < or, +. and  fJ, - , < s~rl < sl' < fJ. + •. 
            Therefore 
            (fJ. -  «t - 21) ••• ({J. - or. - 2.)  ~ 8 ~ (fJl - or. + 2.) •.. (fJ. - «. + 21). 
            Since  the  real-valued  function  on  R  which  Benda any  point. t E  R  into 
            (II. -   a. + 2C) •••  ({J. - or. + 2t)  ie  continuous  at  0,  given  Any  • > 0 
            we can find a  ,  > 0 such  that  for  the  above  Riemann  sum 8  we have 
             18 - (fJI - ori) •••  (fJ. - «.) 1< •. Thus 1 il integrable  on  I  and 
                                           J, J f' (fJ • ...: ori) ... ({J. -   or.). 
                                                           II ... auNN IliftOAll'IOJf  .. II-    111 
               EXAMPLE  4.  If 1 is as above and I: 1 -            R is defined by 
                            I(            )    {I    if  s.,  .•. , s. are rational 
                              SI,  ••• , s.  -   0  otherwise 
          then any open subinterval  of I contains points at which I tak. on the value 
          I and  also points  at which I takes  on the value 0 (thi,  ia a ample oonee-
          quence of the corresponding  fact  for ft -         1). Therefore  both ( .. - aa) ••• 
          (II. - a.) and zero are Riemann  sums col'ft!lpondilll  to an, pu1ition of 1. 
          It followa that I is not integrable. 
          ProJHMition.  RienllJftn inUgrtJtion w  tM lolJtMi,., "..,.,.u.: 
               (I)  111 and ,  are integrable reokalu«l  ~ on 1M .... ......, 
          1 01 E" O&en I + , i. inlef1rtJb,. on I  and 
                                         /, (J+ ,) -     /,1+ /". 
               (I)  111 is on inUgr~ reol-tJolued ~ on 1M ..., inIerNIl  of 
          E" and c E R O&en cf i. integrable on 1 and 
                                                /,cl-c /,1. 
               Given any partition  of 1, a Riemann  IWD for 1+, 00I'ftIPIJIlIII to 
          thie  partition  is  the  sum  of a  Riemann  IIWi1 for I  ~ to ... 
          partition  plus  a  Riemann  IWD  for ,  col'ft!lpondhll  to thiI puIitital,  ..... 
          similarly a Riemann  sum for cf comepondjna  to this· pu1i_ II e ibneI a 
          Riemann  sum for I col'l'e8ponding to this partition.  BeDel the propaIitioD 
          is quite trivial.  (Those wishing to write down a proof in all detail...,  do. 
          by effectinJ ,uitable  minor chan~ in the proof 01 the ~ .... , 
          of Chapter  VI.) 
               An immediate  consequence of the propoeitloa  ia that if 1_ , IN 
          integrable  on 1, then 
                                         J, (J -,) - /,1-J". 
          ProJHMidon.  111 iI em iftI.etIr"",. ,..,... .... /tIftI:lion on Me .... ......, 
          1 oJ E" and I(s) ~ 0 lor aU "E I, lAM /,1 ~ O. 
               For if 8 i. any Riemann IUm for 1 OOJllIpOndiaa to &IlJ' puthlon  of I 
          thenB  ~ O.                                                                           . 
                All in Chapter  VI, there are two immediate  coroUarieI. 
          Corollary  1.  III and ,  are integrGbk ~ /tmditIu ".. '" ..." 
          intInIJlI  01 E" and I(z)  S ,(z) lor aU " E 1, O&en  J, IS J"o 
            _        X.  IItJIJIUUI  IIfftOLU .. 
            GwollGry J.  II I is an integrable real-flalued lunctilm on the cloBed interval 
            I  01 E" IIaot is ddmnined  by aI, ••. , CIa, lis, ..• , b,. and m :S I(z)  :S M lor 
            aU xE I,Uten 
                        m(bs - as) ... (b,. - CIa) :S  J,I:S M(bs - as) ... (b. - CIa). 
                                12.  EXISTENCE OF THE  INTEGRAL.  INTEGRATION ON 
                                                           ARBrrRARY  SUBSETS OF 1:".  VOL11ME. 
            Lemma I.  A reaH10ltuId lunctilm / on a cloaed inlmlal  I 01 E" is integrable 
            on I  if and only  if, gWen Oft1l « > 0, tMr, uialI  a "umber  1 > 0 aucI& IIaot 
             18 - 8.1 < • tDlacruver 8 and S. ar, Riemann fUme lor I corrupondi,., to 
                1                                  1 
            PfJrtitiont  01 I  0/ width leu tha"  I. 
                    The  proof of Lemma 1 of § 3, Chapter  VI  applies verbatim  in  the 
             present case, if we change the symbol la, bl, wherever it occurs, to I, and 
             the symbol  J.. I(z)dz  to  f, /. 
             Deflnilion.           A real-valued function I on a closed interval I of E" is called 
             a .up /tmdilm if there  exists a  partition  (ZI', ZI',  ••• , ZINl),  ••• , (x.', x.1
                                                                                                                               , 
             ••• , ~ ... )  of  1 such  that  for  any  (ZI, •.• , Za),  (J'I, ••• , JI .. ) E I  we have 
             !(Zl,  ... , Za) '" 1(1/1, ... , ,.)  only  if  for  BOrne  i-I, ... , n  such  that 
             ~ '" 111,  the  cloeed interval  in  R  whose extremities are Zi and  11, contains 
             at  leut  one of  the  points  ~,Zil, •••• z.N'. 
                    In other  words, /  is oonatant  on any subset of I  consisting of points 
             (Sl,  ... , Za)  in  which each Zi is restricted  to one of the  subsets  (zl, Z,I) , 
             (s/" sl) •... , (zl'r-I, zl"),  Iz!'.  Ix,', •... , Izl"'.  In  particular,  J takes 
             on only a finite number of distinct  values. The functions of Examples 1 
             and  3 of 11 are step  functions. 
             Lemma  J.  A  IIep /unction  on a closeJ interval 1 in  A'" i. integrable. In 
             particular,  if (Zl', Zl',  ••• , ZINI), ••• , (z.', z.', ... , Z.N_) i. a pArtition 01 I, 
             if lell ... h'il-I ..... Nl; ... ~-I ..... N_ C H, and iJ the IItep Junction I: 1-+ H it auch 
             IAat lor Oft, ;1 - 1, ... , N ;  ••• j j" = I,  ... , N ~  we  have J(Zl,  ••• , z .. )  -
                                                      1
             OIl ... 1e  if sir-I  < ~ < zi' Jor BaM i-I,  ... , n, then 
                        f,1 -                 1:               Cia ... I..(zl' -  ZII&-l)  •••  (z .. 1..  - Zal.-I). 
                                1.-l ••••• N.; ... u.-l ..... N. 
                     For if we define "1I ... Ia(SI ••.. ,~) to be 1 if zi'-I  < ~. < zi' for each 
              i-I, ... ," and  aero  otherwise,  then 1- 1: Ci •.•. I .. f(Ji •••• i_  is  a  function 
                                                                                 I ••... J-
              on I that. baa the value zero at each point (ZI, ••• , Za) of I for which all the 
              iaequalitiea  Si '" si  hold,  for  i ... I, ... ,"  and  j  =  0,  ... , N i.  By  the 
                                                                              12.  IIlUM'IlNCIl  0' ma INTIlOB.a.L              123 
             additivity  of the intep'al  and  Example 2 of the previous section, we have 
             I, (f -       L Cil"''''  lI'il"'''')    = o. By Example 3 of the previous section,  for 
                         il .... ,J.                                                    .   I 
             all  jl,  .•. ,j"  we  have  I, lI'ia ... I .. =  (XIII -             Xlii-I)  • ••  (z..'" -      z..",-I).    Thus 
             the given expression for J,I results from the linearity of the integral, that 
             is, the tint  proposition of the last section. 
             Proposition.              The retJl.."alued lunction I  on the cloaed interlllJl I  01 E- i. 
             inlegrable on I il and only if, lor each e > 0, there exi8t .tep lunction. /I, I. on 
             Iauchthat 
             and 
                                                              /, (fa -- /I) < e. 
                     The proof of this is exactly the same as that of the analogous proposi-
             tion in § 3 of Chapter VI if we make a few appropriate  changes in notation. 
             Since we shall  refrain  from making the  precise transcription,  the  reader 
             should carefully check this statement. 
              Corollary  1.  II the real-valued lunction I on the closed interval I 01 E- is 
              integrable on 1, then it is bounded on 1. 
                     The following simple result could have been proved much earlier, but 
              it is especially easy to prove at this point. 
              Corollary  J.           II 1 C J are cloaed intervala in E" and I: J -                            R is auch that 
             I (x) ... 0 lor all X E J  - 1, then the integral 01 I on J  eziata il and only il the 
              inlegral 01 the re8triction 011 to 1 on 1 exi8tB, in which. case they are equal. 
                     Denoting the restriction of I to I by the 8&lIIe lett.er 1 when 110 confusion 
              is  postJible, this  cOI'oUary states  silllply that  /J J;;;  /r I if J  ::> I  and 1 ill 
              zero outside 1. To prove this, fint  note that  Lemma 2 implies the truth  of 
              Corollary 2 if 
                                     1 is a step fUllction. Next suppose that. J, I exists. Then  for 
              any e > 0 there exist step fundiouslt,  "  on lauch  thatft(z)  S f(z)  S ''(x) 
              for each X E I  and Buch that  /, UI - It)  < t.  l~xtcnd ft, fa to fUllIltiOl;' on 
              J  by setting /l(z)  -I.(x)  ... 0 if x E J  - I.  ThclI 11, I. are step  fUllctiolls 
              on J, l1(x) S I(x)  S Is(x) for all x E J, and  /J (f.  - /l)  -                                J, (fa - /I) < e. 
              Thus  bl exists.  Since  /rf,S J,IS J,/a  and  J,It= bitS /JIS 
               /JI. =  J,I., we have \ /JI - 1,1\ S I, Is - J, It =  J, (f. -II) < E. Since 
             224       X.  IIULTIPLIIINTIlORAI.8 
             the  last  inequality  is  tme  for  ear.h  f  > 0,  we  have  J., I = J, I.  Finally 
             suppose  that  J., I exists.  Then  for any  f  > 0 there  exist step  functions  Uh 
             g. on J  such  that  Ul(X) S lex) S g,(x)  for each x E J  and  J., (gt - Ul) < f. 
             The  restrictions  of  gl, gt  to  I  are  step  functions  on  I.  By  Lemma  2, 
              J, (g. - g~ s f" (g, - gl), 80 that  J, (g, - gl) < f.  Hence  J, I exists,  and 
             this completes  the proof. 
                     It is  now  convenient  to  extend  the  notion  of  integral.  First  let 
             I: E" -       R be a function  which is zero outside  some bounded  subset  of E". 
             We can  then  find  a  closed interval  I  of  En  sueh  that  lex) == 0  for  all 
             x Eel.  We caU I integrable on E" and  define  f.-/:= f,1 if  the  latter 
             integral  exists.  This  makes  sense,  for  suppose  I' C  E"  is another  closed 
             interval  such  that lex) == 0  for  all  x Eel'.  Let J  be still  another  closed 
             interval  of  E", such  that  J  ::> I V  I'.  By  the  last  coroUary,  f,1 exists  if 
             and  only  if  J.,I exists,  in  which  case  these  are  equal,  and  similarly  f"  I 
              exists if and  only  if  fJ I exists, in which case they  are equal.  Therefore  J, I 
              exists  if and  only  if  J" I exists,  in w~ich case they  are  equal. 
                     Now consider an arbitrary  mbset  ACE" and an arbitrary  real-valued 
              function Ion some subset of E" that contains  A. Define]:  E" -                                          R by setting 
             l(x)  =  I(x)  if x E A, J (x)  =  0 if x eA.  We say  that  I  is integrable on  A 
              and define L I to be  f." 1 if the latter  integral  exists. This agrees with  the 
              previous  definition  if  A  is a  closed interval  of E".  For  any  A  and I,  fA I 
              can exist only if the set of points  of A at which J is not zero is bounded  and 
              if I is bounded  on A; this follows from  the  present  defiuition. 
                      For an arbitrary  subset  A C  En, we say that  A htu lIOlume, and define 
               the volume 01 A to be 
                                                                vol (A)  ==  fA 1, 
              if  this  integral  exists.  A necessary  condition  that  vol (A)  exist  is that  A 
              be bounded.  If I is the open or closed interval  in lJft detennined  by Clio ••• , 
              tJ,.,  bl ,  ••• ,  b .. ,  then    vol (I)  -       (b.  -    4.)  ...  (b" -      a,.).    An  oxample  of  a 
               bounded  subset  of IS" having  no volume is the set of all points  of a given 
               rlosed  interval  I  of  E"  all  of  whose  ('oordinatcs  are  rational  numbers 
               (cf. Example  4 of § 1). The word volume, as u!lt'd here, is often  replared  by 
               n-dimensional 1J01ume, or  Jordan measure.  If n = I,  one  often  UBes  the 
               word InItJth instead,  and if n  = 2 the word ClreCl. 
                      The two propositions  of § 1 possess the following immediate  generaliza.. 
               tiona. 
                                                            12. anrraNOJI  01' B1111ft'11G11AL    _ 
          PropGIJ'eJora.  Integration Aoa tAt lollotDi1lf 1iftesril.1/ proper": 
                (1)  II ACE- and I and ,  are i~ltI NGl ... ,.., /ufIt:4itma '" A, 
          tAen I + , ia tfttegrabltl Oft  A anti 
                                         L (f + ,) - fA I + fA ,. 
                (')  II ACE-, I ia em integrabltl ~ /tmt:liIIrt '" A ,., e E B, 
          tAen cJ it w."abliI on A _ 
                Jua usual, it follows that if I and, are integrable on A then 
                                         fA (f - ,) - L 1- L ,. 
          PrOfHM'eJora.  11 I ia em inlefrabltl ~ /tmt:lu. .. 1M __ A of 
          E- tmd/(z)  ~ 0 lor all z E A, tAen fA/~ o. 
           Corollary  1.  II I, ,  are integrabls ~ /tmt:liou '" 1M __ A oJ 
           E- _     I(z)  ~ ,(z) lor all z E A, tAen LIS  fA ,. 
           Corollary  J.  Let I be em ~ ~ /tmeliM& '" 1M ......,  A oJ 
           E-. 8uppoH I1aGt m ~ I(z)  ~ M lor all z E A .,." ., A Acu .........  TAM 
                                     m vol (A)  S  L/~ Mvol (A). 
                Subeets of E" of volume 181'0 are eapeciaIly important.  W." iIopther 
          lOme of their  properties. 
           ProfHM'tJon.  Tlul lolltNirag ~ Itoltl: 
                (1)  A...".  A 01 E- Aoa 1IOlu ... IeI"O if ,., only f, ,.. .., • > 0, 
           1Aer. am. G finite number 01 eloMl (or 01*')  iftImJalI .. If" ..,..  __ 
           contcriu A _       tAt am oltllhoaellOluma ia ,., .... .. 
                 (I)  An1/ eubM 01 G aubM of E- 0/ ........  ia oJ ...... . 
                 (,)  Tlul _ion 014 [mite number of ... of If" 11/ .... ... ia of 
           1IOlu ...... o. 
                 (4)  11 A C B"  Aoa IIolWM Nf'O  _            eM ,., Be .. Acu .......  lAM 
           vol (BVA)  - vol (B - A) ~ vol (B). 
                 (6)  11 A C 1l" 1aaa ........  _I: A - B "  ...........  ~, 
           tAen  fAI- O. 
                 (6)  118 C E-l ia c:ompad and I: 8 - B "  conImuou., lAM eM ".,. 
           01 I ita 8-, i .•. , tAt ,., 
                   «ZI, ... ,z.) EE-:  (ZI, ... ,Za-.)  E8'/(ZI,  ... ,~ -s.t, 
           Aoa~.ro. 
              To prove (1) we mayeupp088 A C I, for lOme closed interval 1 of 8., 
         since only bounded eeta have volume. Let I: 1 -      R be defined by aetting 
         I(~) - 1 if ~ E  A,/(~) - 0 if ~ E  1 - A,so that vol (A)  - 1 . If vol (A) 
                                                                           1
         - 0 then  for any  e > 0 there  is a partition  of 1 8uch that  any  Riemann 
         BUm  for I comaponding  to this partition  has abeolute  value 1_ than  .. 
         But one euch Riemann  sum  for I correspondiq  to this  partition  is the 
         eum·of the volumes of those closed eubintervals  of I  (for the 8ubdivision 
         of I correaponding to the liven  partition)  which contain points of A. Hence 
         A ill contained  in the  union of a finite number of closed interval8 the eum 
         of whose volum.  is 1_ than  .. Convene1y, euppoie  that  for each • > 0 
         we can write A C II V  •.. V IN, where each 1, is a cloeed interval  in ... 
               N 
         and E vol (I,)  < .. For j  - I, •.. , N  we define II: I-R by I'(~) - 1 if 
              1-1 
                                                             N 
         ~ E 1 nIl and II(~) - 0 if ~ E 1 - h  so that Ell is a step function on 
                                                            I-l 
                         If                                N             N 
         I, 0 S/(~) S E/'(~) for all ~ E  I, and  f, ("Eli - 0) ... "E vol (I nI,) 
             "          I-l                               1-1           /-1 
          S E vol (11) <..  Since  for  each  e > 0  I  is  8&Ddwiched between  the 
            I-l                        N 
         two step  functiODB 0  and Ell,  we know  that  11 exists.  Since  10 S 
                                      I-l 
          11 S 1 fll < • for each e > 0, we have  1 "" 0, that  is vol (A) - o. 
                                                            1
                    I-l 
         This provee the part of (1) dealing with closed intervals.  A. for open inter-
         vals, the reeu1t for closed intervals  plus the rerharb  that any open interval 
         in B" is contained  in a closed interval  of the u.me volume and  that  any 
         closed interval  in B" is contained  in an open interval  of twice the volume 
          (namely the open interval  having  the same center  as the closed interval, 
                                                                 1/
          with dimen8ioDB those of the cloeed interval  tim. 2 .) prove (1) for open 
          intervals.  Thus  the  proof  of  (1)  i8  complete.  Parts  (2)  and  (3)  foUo" 
          immediately from (1). To prove (4), first note that we have vol (A - B) -
          vol (A n B) - 0,  by  (2).  Define functions  1a,1 • ./,: B" -  R  by  setting 
                                    11(~) - {~  if:c E B 
                                                  if:cfl  B 
                                    I.(~) - {~  if~EA-B 
                                                  if:ceA-B 
                                    I.(~) - {~  if~EAnB 
                                                  if~eAnB. 
                                                              12. DISTIlHCB  or THB INTIIOItAL        D7 
          Then  1 •. /& ..  f.l  - vol (B),  f .. l. - /.._.1  = vol (A - B) =  0,  and 
           f../a ... fAI"\B 1 == vol (A II B)  ... O. \te have/lex)  + hex) ... 1 if x E  B V  A 
          and fa(x) + /.(x)  = 0 if x fl B V A, so that  vol (B V A}!""  f •. (fa + /.) ... 
           f .. /a + f .. f.  -  vol (B). Also fa(x) - /.(x)  ... 1 if x E B - A and /1(x) -
          I.(x)  - 0  if  x e B - A,  so  that  vol (B - A)  = f." (/& - /.) = f."fa-
           f .. /1 - vol (B),  which completes  the  proof of (4).  For  (5),  auppose that 
          A is contained  in the closed interval  1 of E" and auppose that  If(x) I < ltI 
          for each x E A. DefineJ:  E" - R by settingJ(x)  - lex) if z E A,J(x)  :=' 0 
          if x e A. For any • > 0, paR (1) tella ua that  there  exist.  a step  function 
          ,: l-R  such  that  ,(z)  ~ 0  for  all  x E 1,  ,(x)  ~ 1  for  x E A,  and 
           J"  < •. Then -M,(x)  sJ(x)  S Mg(x)forallx  E  Ii f, (M, - (-JIg» .... 
           2M J"  < 2M e  follows.  This  being  true  for  each  e > 0,  /, J exists. 
           Since  J, (-M,)  s /,J s /, M"  we  have  I I, '\ S M I, , < Me,  and 
           aince this  is true  for all .e > (, we have  /,1'" o. But  fA / ia by definition 
           f,J, so  fA / .. 0, finishing (5). To prove  (6), we may auppose that 8 C 1, 
           where 1 is some closed interval  in E"-I.  Given allY E> 0, by uniform con-
           tinuity  we can find a number  a > 0 auch that  I/(p) - J(q) I < E whenever 
           p, q E 8  are such  that  d(p, q) < a.  Choose a  partition  of 1 of width  leaa 
           than 6/v"n"=l. Let  this  partition  of I  subdivide  I  into  the  closed sub-
           intervale  11, ••• , IN, so that  1a, •.. ,IN are closed subintervale  of 1 whose 
           aides  are  all  1888  than  a/v"n"=l,  1 = 1a V  ... V  IN,  and  vol (I)  = 
             N 
            E vol (II)'  If p, q E  II II 8  then  d(p, q) < a, so  that  If(p)  - /(g) I < •. 
            1-' 
           Hence if 1111 8  is nonempty,  the  graph  of the  reatriction  of /  to 1;11 8, 
           that is,                                           . 
                 «Xa, .•. , x.)  E E" : (Xa, •.. , x __ a) E 1; II 8, /(XI, .•. , x __ a)  = z.1 
           is contained  in the set 
           where ml and M i  are respectively the minimum  and  the  maximum values 
           attained  by I on  I; f'\ S,  and  the  latter  set  is a  dosed  interval  in  Jo;.  of 
           volume  (M; - 1tl;)vol (Ii)  < E vol (Ij),  HClwe the  gl'&ph of J ia contained 
           in the union of a finite number of closed intervala  in E" the aum of whose 
                                     N 
            volumes ia at moat I: f  vol (Ij)  = E vol (I).  Sim'c E is all arbitrary  positive 
                                    ;-1 
            number,  (6) is implied by (1). 
         ",...,.,don.        II A, B are IUb8dI 01 E" aucA U&at vol (A'" B) - 0  _ 
         I: A V B -     R ia if&le(/rable em A t.md em B, II&en 
                                          Lv.l - LI+ 1.1. 
               To prove thie, define II, I., la: E" -+ R by 
                                    I.{)      {/(:e)  if:e E A 
                                    liS  -       0     if:e(lA 
                                    I.(s) _ {!(OS)  if:e E B 
                                                       if S (l B 
                                              {/(S)    if sEA'" B 
                                    la(te) -      0    if:e (l A '" B. 
          Then  I .. Is -    IA I and  1 ... 1. -  I. I· The  exiatence of the last  two int. 
          gra1a impU.  that I ia bounded,  80 by (5) of the  previous proposition  we 
          have 1 .. / -     IAf'\BI - O.  Since II(s) + I.(:e) - I.(s) - I(s) if :e E  AU B 
                      1 
          and II(s) + I.(:e) - I.(:e) - 0 if :e E A U B, we can therefore  compute 
                                                        1 
               Lv. I - I .. (/1 + I. - la) - 1 ... 1+ 1.·1. - 1 .. /a - L 1+ 1.1. 
                In the apecial  cue 1- 1, the  proposition  aays that  if  A  and  B are 
          subsets of E- with volume whose intenection  baa volume 181'0, then 
                                   vol (A V  B) .. vol (A) + vol (B). 
                We now have the main exiatence theorem. 
          Theorem.        Let  A C Eft  be  a  Bet  VJitA  I/olume and  let I: A -+ R  be  a 
          bound4ld luneticm tMt  is continuous except on a subaet oJ A oJ volume uro. 
          Tiaen  IA I  e:eiaU. 
                Let us fint prove this in the apecial cue where A ia a cloeed interval 1 
          and I ia continuous  on 1. Here the  proof ia an  eaay modi&cation 01 the 
          earlier proof for ft -     1. Let MER be luch that  I/(s) ISM lor all :e E  1. 
          Given e > 0, the uniform continuity  of I on 1 giva  us a a > 0 eucb that 
           1/(:e) - 1M I < e whenever :e, 11 Eland  des, 1/) < a.  Chooee a  partition 
          of 1 of width  lese than  al Vn. Suppose this partition  eubdivid.  1 into 
          the cloeed eubintervals1        ,  ••• ,1",80  that 1== 11 V·,··  U lit and no two 
                                         1
          of  the  Ila  overlap  except  poeeibly at  extremities.  Thus  vol (II'" 1.) .. 
          o if j, k .. 1, •.. ,N and j  pi k.  If :e, 11 E  1/ then  d(s,1/) "< a, 80  we have 
           1/(:e) - J(y) I < e.  We define It,!.:  1-+ R  by -UIlI 
                                                                            ,2 .  .xJ1I'I'BJI~ 01' TIIII ...........  L     119 
            Ia(z) = {min  '_IM(Y) : Y E IjJ  if  z E Iii s e I. for any  A: ~j 
                                                             if  s  is in at least  two of the aeta II,  ..• ,1. 
            f,()        {maX '/(y)  : Y E IjJ  if s E h  s e I. for any A: ~j 
              • z  co                 M                     if  z is in at least  two of the aeta 1 ..... ,1 •. 
             Then fl, fl are step  functions  on I, fl(s)  S f(s)  S f.(s)  for each s E I  and 
                                    •                            • 
             J, (J. - II)  ... E  k (Js - fl)  SEe vol (II)  - • vol (l).  Binee IUCh 11,1. 
                                   I-I                         I-I 
             exist  for  each  f  > 0,  our  criterion  for  integrability  on  a  closed interval 
             impliee the  existence of  J, f· This  proves  the  epeeial cue. 
                    Now consider the general cue of the theorem, with  A C .. a let with 
             volume  and  I  a  hounded  real-valued  function  on  A  that  is  continuoUi 
             except  on a 8ubset of volume zero. If 8 C A is the sublet  where I is not 
             continuou8, then  A - 8 haa volume (by part (4) of the propoeition OR aeta 
             of volume lero)  and  1.1-0 (by part  (5) 01 the same propoeition).  II we 
             can prove  that  f._a f  exiete,  the  precediJlI  propoeition  will  imply  that 
             IA I -'/A-. 1+ /.1- IA-af. We  may  therefore  replace  A  by  A - 8, 
             if neceaaary, to obtain  the simplilyilll  UIUJIlption that lis continUOUl on A. 
             Fix a closed intetvail  C" IUch that  A C 1. Extend  the de6nition  of I 
             to  1, redefining I on  1 - A if necaary,  80 that I{s) - 0 if s E  1 - A. 
             We then  have  to 8how that  /, f exiete. Suppoee  tha~ I/(s) ISM for all 
             s E  1. Letg:  I -R be defined byg{z)  - 1 if zE A,,{s)  - Oils E  1- A. 
             Then  /, g existe, this  being jUit vol (A).  Suppoee  • > 0 II liven.  W. can 
             then find a partition  of 1 such that any two Riemann 1U1Dl10r, cornepond-
             ing to this  partition  differ by Iell  than  e. Suppoee that this  partition  sub-
             dividee 1 into the closed subintervale  11, •.. ,1.,80  that I-I, V  ••• V I. 
             and  no two of the subintervale  11 overlap,  except pcaibly  at. extremities. 
             The points of I  that are contained  in more than one 11 are a let 01 volume 
             lero.  Let  P  he  the  number  of  lubintervale  11, ... ,1.  that  are  entirely 
             contained  in A, and  let  Q be the  number  01 these subinterYalI  that have 
             points  in common with  A. We may suppoee 11, ... ,1.80  numbered  that. 
             Ii C  A if 1 SiS P, that 11 contaiDl both pointe 01 A and pointe oil - A 
              if P  <j S Q and that 11 C 1- A if Q <j S N. Then t.wo Rieman08UIDI 
                                                                                                         ,. 
             for  g  correeponding  to  the  given  partition  01  1  are  I: vol  (11)  and 
               CI                                  CI                                                   I-l 
              E vol (Ii)'  Therefore  E  vol (II)  < e. The reetriction  of f to each clOlled 
              j-t                               1-"+1 
              subinterval  II, ... , I,. il continuoUl, 80 that  /,,1 exists lor j  - 1, ••• , P. 
              Therefore  for  each i = 1, ... , P  there  are  step  functioDl  laid': II-R 
              Buch  that  N(z)  S fez)  S N(z)  for  all  z E  11  and  /"  (J' -/a')  < elN. 
              Now  define  a  pair  of  functions  la, f.: 1- R  in  the  foUowilll  faahion: 
            If sEll for IOIJle  unique j  - 1, ••. , N  we let 
                      I.(s) - N{s)          and  I.(s) -/i(s)               if j  ... 1, ••. , p 
                      I.(s) -     -M  and  I.(s) - M                        if j  ... p + 1, ••• , Q 
                      I.(s) -/'(s)  - 0                                     if j  -  Q + 1, ... , N. 
            IfsEI/formoretbanonej                        -1, ... ,N~aet 
                                            I.(s) -     -M  and  I.(s) - M. 
            Then 1.,/.  are atep functiOl'l8 on 1 and I.{s) S I(s)  S I.(s) for all s E 1. 
            Furthermore, making a repeated application of the preceding proposition, 
                                      " 
                J, (f. -/~ - 1: J"  (f. -Ii) 
                                     I-l 
                                      ~                            0                             " 
                                 - I; /"  (f. -Ii) + I; /" (f. -Is) + I; J" (f. -/~ 
                                     I-l                        1-1'+'                        1000+' 
                                       ~                             0                      " 
                                 - 1: /" (fal-/i)  + 1: /,,2M + I; J" 0 
                                     I-l                •  1-1'+'                        1-0+1 
                                 S J::. + 2M  I; vol (11) S • + 2M. - .(1 + 2M). 
                                      l"I            /-1'+1 
            Since • wu an arbitrary  positive number, our criterion for intecrability 
            on a cbed interval apin impli.  that  /, I exiata. The proof is now com-
            plete. 
                   80 far the only eubleta of E- that are known to have volume are closed 
            intervale, eete of volume aero, and eete that may be obtained from theae by 
             put (4) of the propoeition on leta of volume aero (page 22&). The theorem 
            ...,..  ua to pve other examples of leta with volume. 
                    Exuaor.L          Let 1 be a closed interval  in B-1 and let 'PI, fII be continu-
             oua real-valued functioDl on I such that  'PI(s) S fII(S) for all s E I. Then 
             the_ 
             f (s., "', Sa)  E E- : (%., ... , z..-i) E I, 'PI(%., ... , %11-.) < Sa  < fII(%., ... , %a-') t 
             hu volume. For if MER is such that  I fI.(%) I, I fII(%) I :S M for all % E 1 
             and J C B" it the clOlled interval 
                           1<.., ..• , s.) E 11-: (St, ••. , z..-i) E I, s. E [-M, Mlt, 
             theD the function /: J -               R which hu the value one at each point of the 
             .t in qu.tion  and value IeJ'O at all other pointe of J  is not continuoua 
             onl7 at pointa of the form (s.,  ••• , s_., fI.(S., ••• , z..-1»  or (%It ••• , S~l' 
             .,.<St, •.. ,z..-i).  Since th.-e latter  are  a set of volume zero,  /,,1 exiata. 
             Thie Ia Wuetrateci in Figure 36. 
                                                                             • 
                                                                             •••  I'I'UA'RD  IIft'SGIIAI.a    lSI 
           F'lauu  31. The UDit ball ill JlI .... volume. Except  for .....  of volume HrO it II aaad-
                          wiabed  bet....  the  .....  of  tile  ooatiDuou  real-ftlued  fWUltiou 
                          :I: ,,: JlI-.. where  AA.'"  - ", 1 - at' - aIt'  if  .. ' + .. ' S 1  aDd 
                          •     .., - 0 If at' + .. ' > 1. 
                                                                          • a.  ITERATED INTEGRALS. 
                  When the integral  of a  continuous  function  of one variable  actually 
           baa to be computed one uaually UIe8 antiderivatives.  The main method for 
           computiq  integrals of functiona of several  variables  is reduction  to the 
           one-variable cue by means of iterated  integrals. 
                  In the following, for any sets A C B- and B C Era we identify  A X B 
           with a .ublet  of B-+- in the obvious way: 
           A X B - «Zl, ... , Sa, Ill, ... , II.) E B-+- : (Zl, .... z.) E A, (JIl, ... , 1/..) E BJ. 
            r ...... "..  1M A C B-, B C Era tmtl  1M I: A X B -+ R.  SvppoBe /AXlJI 
           ___ tI&at lor eacI& z E A 1M junction  Ie.): B -+ R giwn  by le.)(1/) = 
           I(z. II) .. ~ ora B. TA4m if 1M jvndion  on A whoae IIGlue at eacI& z ia 
            /.1"" .. tItmoI«l by  /.1-Aaw 
                                                   !AXIII-!A(!./). 
            (2'A ..........  o/IM ..... in 1M ".".",  moN ~ Iorm. 
                                          LXII 1- L (/./(s, lI)dy)  tlz.) 
                  If we extend I to a function on g.+- by defining it to be zero outside 
            A X B, the theorem  becomes equivalent  to the  analogous statement  for 
           _       X.  IIVLTlPLII  IHTZORAL8 
           the  special  case  A  = g.., B = E ....  In  this  special  case,  the  integrability 
           of /  on B-+- implies that /  must  be zero outside  some bounded  subset  of 
           B-+-, therefore outside some closed interval  1 X J of g..+-, 1 and J being 
           closed intervals  in  E" and  E- respectively.  It follows that  the theorem  iB 
           equivalent  to the  analogous  statement  for the  restriction  of /  to 1 X J. 
           ThUi without  any lOll of generality  we may assume that  A, B are closed 
           intervala in E", II- respectively.  We make this assumption,  and first prove 
           the  theorem  when /  is a  step  function  on  A X B.  In  this  case,  for  any 
           ~ E  A the function /(.) is a step function 011 B, 80 that  1.1c.) exists without 
           any further  assumption.  If /1, /1, ... , /. are step  functions  on  A X B  and 
                                                                                             • 
           the theorem  holds for each Ii, then  the theorem holds for E Ii, for 
                                                                                            1-1 
            (  t/I- t 1 11- t 1 (r II) -1 (t ( II) -1 (r til)' 
           jA)(JI  I_I        1-1    A)(JI       I_I    A  J.             A   I-l  1.            A  J. 1_' 
           But  any  step  funetion  on  A X B  is the  Bum of a  finite  number  of step 
           functions  on  A X B each of which is of the  following aimple type:  there 
           are  subsets  8 ,  ••• , 8" •• of R,  each  8. being  either  a  lingle  point  or an 
                              1
           open interval,  such that 
                            f (~I, .•• , :.:,,+_) E 8"+- : :.:. E 8 , .•. , ~.+- E 8 ... ) 
                                                                       1
            is a lubset  of AX B and the ltep function baa a constant  value c E  R on 
            thil IUbaet of AX B and the value aero on the complement of this aubaet. 
            For a step  function  on  A X B of the above simple type  the theorem  can 
            be verified directly,  each aide of the equality  in queation reducing immedi-
            ately  to c times the product  of the lengthl  of the leta 8 ,  ••• , 8 ......  Bence 
                                                                                        1
            the  theorem  holds  whenever  /  is  a  ltep  function  on  A X 11. Suppoae, 
            finally, that / iI any function aatisfying the hypotheses of the theorem.  For 
            any I > 0 there are step functions II, lion  A X B such that /1(')  ~ 1(')  ~ 
            1.(,) for  all  , E  A X B  and  lAX. (f. -/~ < e.  We  then  have  fAx. II S 
             fAXIII S  fAx.I •.  Furthermore,  for  each  ~ E A  we  have  (f~(8)W) S 
            1(.,(11) S  (f,)(.,(y)  for  each  11 E  B,  so  that  J. (f~(., S f./(., S  f. (f~(8). 
            But  f. It and  f. I. are  step  functions  on  A  and 
            Since such I" I. can be found for any. > 0, it follows that  L (/. I) exists. 
            We can therefore  write 
                                                                               13.  IftIlA.,-aD  INftGIIA.IA      131 
           or 
                                                   /l                               / 
                                            Lxa S L (1./) S Lxa .. 
                                                                               • 
           Combining this with  Lx./1 S  IAxal S  Lxa/ we get 
                                  I Lx.l - L (1.1) I S Lx. CI. -111 < .. 
           The theorem  follows from the faet  that  the lut inequality  holda for aD)' 
           .>0.                                                                                                      . 
                  We clearly have the symmetric result that if I is integrable  OIl A X B 
           then  lAx. 1- I. (IA I), provided that. IA "s, ,)cfs exiata for each ,  e B. 
            Corollary  I.  Let I be an i7&t8grable reaHtaluecl/UfldiM&  on 1M ..... A oJ 
           E-, let B be a cloatrd interval in B-, cmd let T A: A X B -                      A "1M ~ 
           on. the firMlactor, that ii, 1I'A(S, ,) -            s i,f sEA,  ,E B. 2"_ 
                                            IAxa/oTA - (IAI) vol (B). 
            (In anot1&er notation, IAx./(s) cfsd,  - (L I(s)cfs)(f. .).) 
                  For  z E A  and  ,E B  we have  CI 0 TA)C-'(') - CI. TA)(S,  ,) -/(a) 
           BO  that  I. CI 0  TA)(., - I./(z)  -/(z)  vol (B).  If IOTA  is batepable  _ 
            A X B  we get  IAxa/o 1I'A - L  (jvol  (B»  - (/..1) vol (B).  lienee  we 
            need only show that  Lx./o 1I'A exiata. To do tbiI~ we" nduoe tID the 
            cue A - E- by extending I to a fullCtion OIl  II- thM ........  ....,  M 
            eaeh point of E" - A. If we then chooee a cloeed intenall  C ..... thM 
           Ii. lero at eaeh point of E- -1, we reduce to the cue A - I. ThU", we 
            may .. ume that A is a closed interval in P. ThiI -Dl., the ....... of 
            IA I implies that,  liven  any  • > 0, we 0Ul  Incl atep f\mot.iau 1-./. _  A 
            such  that  II(z) S I(z) S I.(s) lor  -.eh  a E A .. /A CI. -IS> < .. ".. 
            II 0  11' A, I. 0  T A are .tap  functions  on A X B aucb that ,.. each • E A X B 
            we have (f, 0  1I'A)(') S  (f 0  TA)C,) S (f, 0  TA)(') and L_C/. 0 TA -I. OTA)-
            lAX. (f. -I,)  o1l'A  -       (L (f, -IS»  vol (B) < • vol (8).  B81U!8 /.. ... !. TA 
            exists, as was to be shown. 
                   If we apply  Corollary 1 to the cue 1- 1, we pt the followia& aimpl. 
            result:  if  ACE- hu  volume  and  Be B- is a  eIoIecI iD&ervai, &hen 
            vol (A X B) ... vol (A) vol (B).  In particular,  if A hal RIO volume 10 baa 
            AXB. 
                        n .. worth remarki._t  this point that the theorem  remains true if we 
               replace the UIUIIlption  that /Ca) is integrable  on  B  for all  Z E A  by  the 
               MIUIIlption that/Ca, is integrable  on B for all z E 4 - 8, where 8 is a subset 
               of A of valume  181'0,  if we then underatand  1.1(., to be an arbitrary  ela-
               IDtIlt of eome bounded eubeet of R whenever s E 8. To see this,  note  fint 
                that  B  may  be  IllUmed  bounded,  10  that  vol (8 X B) - O.  Therefore 
                I~/-O. If we define,:  A X B-R by,(.)  -/(.) if, E 8 X B, other-
                wile  ,(.)  - 0,  then  IAXB' -0.  Therefore  IAXB (f - g) = !AXB                                                                          But 
                                                                                                                                                       . 
                                                                                                                                                     /
                (f - ,): A X B - R baa the same  restriction  as /  to (A  - 8) X B and  is 
                181'0 on 8 X B, 10 that  .lA-.,XB / exista and equala  LXB (f - ,) -                                                                  LXB /. 
                ThUi 
                Corollary  t.  1M tile .. A C B-1  be ~ and haN POl""" and ,., 
                9'1, fPI: A -            R be coMnUOU /ad ... IUCI& tAat 9'1(S) S fPI(z) lor all z E A. 
                2'_ if / ... coMnUOU  retIHtaluMI /urtclitIA on 1M .. 
                         B - ((Sl, ... , z.) E E- : (Sa, ... , z..-a) E A, 
                                                                         9'I(s..  • •• , s_a)  S z. S 9'1(3:1, ••• , s_a) J, 
                .. ,... Ii - IA <[.'1), ... r.../ .. 1M fat:timt on, A -- IIfIluc at 
                          (                - -\ . L .. t-a· .. ..a.-a''f(                            - \.01.. 
                ., S"  "',"'-11  U                            .. ,PI ..........  ,    S ..... ,~ 
                          Let B be a cloeecl interval  in  R containing 9'I(A) U fPlCA), 10  that 
                8 C A X B.  Extend  /  to  _  function  on  A X B  by  Betti.  1(') - 0  if 
                • e A X B - 8. Then /  ia bounded  and  is oontinuoua  at  any point  of 
                 A X B that is not of the form 
                        (s ..... , z..-I,  9'I(s.,  ••• , z..-a»                       or  (ZI, ••• , Sa_I, IPt(ZI, •.• , z..-a». 
                 'l"I-.later  point. form a let of volume 181'0, by part (6) of the proposition 
                 OR .. of volume 181'0. Since A X B baa volume (by the comment following 
                 CoraDarr 1), 1.1- IAXBI exiata. AlIo  for  each  (ZI, .•• , Za-a) E  A, 
                        r  I ............. ' -            t 1( ... ... , z.)'"  -                    /. ... PI ..........  ,   /(SI,  ••. , z.) .... 
                       J.                                J.                                .           ... (II, ...... -'·'l· 
                 HeDGe the theorem  ia applicable  to the  present  A, B and I. giving 118 the 
                 ..... n.ult. 
                                                                            , 
                                                                              '4. CBAHOII OJ' VA.IIUBLII         J35 
                  In favorable  circumatances Corollary 2 may be applied  repeatedly  to 
           express an integral  over a subset of E" &8 an n-fold iterated  integral. 
                  If we apply Corollary 2 to the case where n ... 2, /  ... 1 and  A ... [a, b) 
           (for BOrne a, b E  H, a < b) we obtain  the well-known fact that  the area of 
           the plane set bounded by the lines:ll - a and:ll - b and the curves 1/ ... 1P1(:Il) 
           and  11  -   1Pt(:Il) is  f (",,(:Il) -   1P1(:Il»d:ll. Howev~r we have  actually  proved 
           BOmething nontrivial  because this is now a theorem,  not a definition. Simi-
           larly,  if n - 3 and I... 1, for any  compact  subset  A of the  plane that  has 
           area,  the volume of the subset of ga lying over A and between z =  1Pl{:Il, y) 
           and z .. ",,(:Il, 1/) is  fA (1Pt(:Il, 1/)  -   1P1{:Il, 1/»d:ll dy. 
                                                                          •••  CHANGE  OF VARIABLE. 
            Lemma.  Let D be II comptICC eubNt oJ the open lUlnet U oJ E". TAm there 
           e:z;iat ",buta D', V oJ U, with D' comptICC and V open, auch that 
                                                    DCVCD'CU. 
                  Each point of D is contained in an open ball of Eft Buch that the closed 
            ball with  the same oenter and  radius is entirely  contained  in  U. Since D 
            is compact, we may find a finite set of such open balls whose union contains 
            D. We may then take V to be the union of this finite set of open balls, D' 
            the union of the corresponding closed balls. 
            Propoaition.  ("Partition.  oj URityU).                     Let D be a compact aubaet 0/ E" 
            and l8t (U,I ,EB be a collection oJ open Bubaet.t 0/ E" whoae union contaim D. 
            TAm there i8 a finite Nt 0/ continuous Junctiona t/I., ... , t/lN: E" -. [0,1] auch 
            that 
                                               "'1(:Il) + ... + "'N(:Il) -       1 
            Jor ttu:h :Il E D and eada "', i. uro outBids a comptICC sublet oJ one oJ ~ Bell 
            ( U,I,EB• 
                   Start  with  any  continuous  function  h:  R -. R  Buch that  h{x) ... 0 if 
            :Il S 0,  while h{:Il) > 0  if  x > OJ  for  example,  we  may  take  h(x)  =  x  for 
            :Il > O.  Then  the  function  ,:  R -             R  given  by  ,(:Il) .. 1&(1  - zI)  has the 
            properties  that  ,(:Il) - 0  if  1:Ili ~ 1  while  ,(x)  > 0  if  1:Ili < 1.  Hence  if 
            " > 0, then ,(n) is aero for  1:Ili ~ 1/" and positive for 1:Ili < 1/".  For each 
            point P E  D ohoose fl. > 0 such that  the cloaed ball in E" of center P and 
            radius  1/". is entirely  contained  in one of the sets  I U,I                     ••  Let  Bp be the 
                                                                                            ,E 
            open ball in E" of center  P and  radius  1/" .. Since D is compact  there  is 
            a  finite  subset  PI, ... , PN  of  D  such  that  DC U = B.I V  ... V BpN• 
           _       X.  IIVL'ftPLII  INTIIORALB 
           Set 
           for,;  E  U and i-I, ... , N. Then each tp4 ia a continuous lunction on the 
           open aet U::> D with values in [0, 1] and 4PI(%) + ... + tpN(Z)  -                         1 for all 
           % E  U. In addition,  for each i  = I,  ... , N, the points where tp4 ia not aero 
           are contained in a compact subset of one of the sets I U.I.e". Now use the 
           lemma to obtain  subsets D' and  V of E", respectively compact and open, 
           such that 
                                                  DCVCD'CU. 
           Apply what haa been proved above to the compact aet D' and the collection 
           of open  sets  I V, U - DI  (whose union  contains  0').  We get  functions 
           analogous to the above tpla and these we group into two batches, according 
           to whether or not the set of points at which the function ia not aero is con-
           tained in a compact aubset of V, then we add the aeparate batches. We get 
           continuous  lunctiona  'I, '. on  an  open  set  U'::> 0' with  values  in  [0, 1] 
           auch that '.(s)  + '.(s)  - 1 for each z E  U' while '. is aero at each point of 
            U' outside a compact IUbaet of V and 'I il aero at each point of U' outside 
            a  compact  aublet  of  U - D.  Bince 'I(Z)  - 0  for  each  z E  u' - V  and 
            ainee V C 0', we have '1(';)  - 0 if Z E  U' - D'. Also '.(z)  - 0 if zED, 
            so  that  '1(%) - 1  if  zED.  For  i-I, ... , N . we define "'.: E" -                        R  by 
            ",.(z)  -  tp~Z)'I(S) if Z E  U ~ U' and "'i(Z) .. 0 if sEE"  - U ~ U'. Bince 
            "'.  ia continuoua on the  open seta  U ('\ U' and  E" - D' (it is aero on the 
            latter),  it is continuous on their union, which ia E". The other desired prop-
            erties of "'I, ... , "'N follow immediately  from their construction. 
            Corollary.  Let D be a compaet aubaet 01 the open  aubaet U 01 E".  Tlaen 
            there is  4  continuoua lunction "': E" -              [0,11 8'IA!1&  lAst ",(,;) -     1 lor eacA 
            zED tmd "'(x) = 0 lor each x 0tAt8itU some compaet aubaet 01 u. 
                  Thia baa eaaentially appeared  in the  proof above, but it also follows 
            easily from the atatement  of the proposition.  Let 0' and  V be aubaeta of 
            E", ,respectively compact and open, luch that 
                                                  DCVCD'CU. 
            Bince 0' C  VV (U - D),  we can apply  the  proposition  to  the  compact 
             let 0' and the collection of open seta I V, U - Dt to get continuous func-
             tiona "'., ",.: E" -     [0, 1] such  that  "'1(Z) + ",.(x)  -        1 for each zED'  and 
             "'I and "'. are sero outside  compact subsets of V and  U - D respectively. 
                     "'I is 1 on D and aero outBide 0', we may take '" - ~. 
             Since 
                                                                     ,4. CHANG.  01' VAIIUJILII     = 
                We remark that  the functions "'I, ... , "'N of the propoeition and &Iso 
          the function '" of the corollary may be chosen 10 .. to palla all partial 
          derivatives of order m, for any given poeitive integer m, by ltanin,  with 
          h(z)  -  Z·+I  for z > O.  In  fact it can be .hown  that  "'I •••• , "'N. '" poIIeII 
          all  partial  derivativel  of all orden  if we take  "(:c) - roll" lor 1/1 > 0  (cf. 
          Problem 26, Chapter VI). 
          Lemma.  The real-valued lunction I on the cloaed inlmlall  01 E- ia ~ 
          on 1 il and only iI, lOT each f  > 0, there eziat continuOUI ~ fundioM 
          II, J. on 1 BUCk that 
                                   II(z)  S I(z)  S I.(z)     lor tach z E 1 
          and 
                                                J, (JI - It> < •. 
                The  proof makes repeated  Ule  of the  tint  propoeition of  12. Firat 
          suppose that  I aati8fies the  given condition. Then  given • > 0 there  are 
          continuous functions Ih I,: 1- R 8uch that  II(z)  S fez) S /.(z)  for each 
          z Eland  J, (JI -/1)  < ./3. Since /1 and /. _ are intepable  on 1 there are 
          ltep  functions N, N', N, /t"  on 1 such that  N(z) S/I(:C)  SN'(z)  and 
          /t'(z)  S /.(z)  S /t"(z)  are  true  for  each  z E I  and  J,(N' -/1')  < _/3, 
           J, (/t"  - N) < f/3.  The  step  functions  N,  /t"  are  luch  that  N(z)  S 
          I(z)  S /t"(z)  for  each z E  I  and 
           J,(N' - N) = J, (N' - It) + J, (J. - II) + J, (JI - N) 
                    S  J, (N' - N) + J, (JI -/1) + J, VI" - N) < ;  + ; + ;  - .. 
          Thus/ is integrable on 1. To prove the converse, IUPpoee first that  any 
          step fun('tion on laatisfies  the given condition. We reuon in the laDle way 
          &8 above. If I i8 integrable on I  then for any • > 0 there are step functicma 
          110 lion  1 8uch that /t(z)  S /(z)  S II(z)  for each z Eland  J, (fl - It> < 
           ./3.  Since step functions are I88Umed to aatisfy the given condition. there 
           are  continuous  functions It', /t", It'd":  1 -           R  lOch that  we  wUl have 
          N(z)  S /I(Z)  S N'(z)         and  /I'(Z)  S I.(z)  S 1t"(III)  for  all  III E  1  -and 
           J, (N' - N) < f/3,  J, (It"  -It')  < e/3.  Thus  the  continuoua functiona 
          N,It"  are 8u('h that N(z)  S fez) S N'(z)  for all z Eland 
           J, (It"  - N) = J, (It"  - It) + J, V. -/1) + J, UI - N) 
                     S J, (J,"  - N) + J, (JI - II) + J, (JI" - N) < -j. + ;  + ;  --t 
              10 \hat l-tisfieI  the given condition.  Therefore  it remains only  to show 
               that  for any  step  function  I on  1 and any  e > 0 there  exist  continuous 
               functiona  1.,/.  on  1  such  that  /a(S) S /(s)  S I,(s)  for  all  s Eland 
               J, C/e -/a)  < eo But any step function on 1 is the sum of a finite number of 
              Rep lunctlo .. on 1 each of which is of the following simple type:  there are 
              IUbIetI 8., ... , 8. C R, each  B. being  either  a  single  point  or  an  open 
               in ..... , IUch that  the set (Sa,  ••• , z.) E  E" : Sa E  Ba, ••• , s .. E  B" I is a 
               IUbeet of 1 and the step function baa a constant  value c E  R on this subset 
               and the value 0 on the complement of this subset. Therefore  we need only 
               prove tbat a step function on I of the above simple type satisfies the indi-
               cated  condition.  'nlat  is, if for i  ... I, ... , n the subset  B, C R is a single 
               poiot  or  an  open  interval  such  that  I (Zl,  ••• , z..) E  E" : s. E  B ,  ••• , 
                                                                                                                                              I
               s.. E  B.t  is a subset  of 1 and  if I: 1 -                            R has the constant  value c E  R on 
               this subset  and  the  value zero on its complement,  we must show that  for 
               any  • > 0 there  are  continuous  functions  / .. /.: 1- R such  that  /I(s)  S 
               I(s)  S I.(s)  lor  aU % Eland  J, (J. - /I)  < e. It clearly  IUfficea to  prove 
               this lor c - 1. Allume  that 1 happens to be the closed interval  in E" deter-
               mined by  aa, .•. , a., b., •.. , b..  First  suppose  that  some  B.  is  a  single 
               poiot,  say  B. - CI. E  (a., btJ.  For  any  a > 0 choose a  continuous  function 
               .,:  R -       (0, 1) such  that  ';(CI.) -                   1 and  .,,(%.) - 0  if  I Sa - CI.I > a.  Define 
               41: E" -         (0, 1)  by  ~(s ..... , z..)  -                   ,,(SI).      Then  ° S /(s)  S ~(z)  for  all 
               sEland 
                       J, (41 - 0) S 2a(b, - a,)  ..• (b. - a.) , 
                which can be made 1_ than  e by taking a small enough. It remains to con-
                sider  the  ease where each B, = (cri, fJi), where Oi S cr, < fJ, S b •  Yor any 
                                                                                                                                       i
                a > 0 such tbat  2a < fJ. - cra, ••• , fJ. - cr", choose a continuous  function 
                la: E" -        (0, 1)  such  that  /a  is  1  on  the  closed  interval  determined  by 
                era + a, •.• , CI" + a, fJ. - a, ••. , fJ" - a  and  0  outside  the  open  interval 
                determined  by  era, ... , CIro, fJ.. • .. ,fJ", and  choose a  continuous  function 
                I.: E" -        (0, 1] that  is  1 on  the  closed interval  determined  by  cra, ••• , cr", 
                /l., .•• , fJ.  and  0  outside  the  open  interval  determined  by  CIa - a, ... , 
                CIro  -    I, fJ. + I,  "', fJ" + I.  Then /a(S) S /(s)  S /.(s)  for all  s Eland 
                 J, (J. -/a) S  f ... (J. -/1) 
                   S (fJa - CIa + 24) ••. (iJ" - cr" + 2a) - (fJl - cr. - 28) ... (fJ .. - cr" - 2a). 
                 Since polynomial  functions  are  continuous,  this  latter  expression can  be 
                 made less than.  by taking  8 sufficiently near zero, and  this completes the 
                 proof. 
                                                                14.  CllANOJI  01' vuua'"   139 
         Theorem.        Let A be 41& open aub,et oj E·, I(J: A -+ /:I.'" 4  one-one continu-
         owly  differentiable m4p whOle ja.cobi4n J., i, nowhere zero on  A.  Suppoae 
         tIuJt the Junction J: I(J(A) -+ R i, zero outaide 4  co,np4Ct aubaet oj I(J(A) 4nd 
         tIuJt h'A) J exiata. Then 
               Since the  proof is quite  complicated  it will be given  in a  number  of 
         steps.  We first make a few preliminary  remarks  to be borne in mind below. 
         The inverse function  theorem implies that I(J(A) is an open subset of Era and 
         that  the map I(J-I: I(J(A) -+ A is also continuously  differentiable.  Any  com-
         pact subset  of A (or I(J(A» is mappe4  by I(J (or I(J-I) onto  a compact  subset 
         of I(J(A) (or A), since the image of a ~mpact set under  a continuous  map 
         is compact.  Similarly,  lince  the inverse image of an open set under  a con-
          tinuous  map is open  (by the fi1'8t proposition  of Chapter  IV),  I(J induces  a 
         one-one corresPondence betw~n the open lIubsets of A and thOle of I(J(A). 
          If I is continuous  the &ll8umption that  f."Al exists  is superfluous,  for  this 
          fact  follows automatically  from  the  &ll8umption that  1 is zero  outside  a 
          compact  subset  of the  open set I(J(A). The  reason 1 is &ll8umed to be zero 
          outside a compact subset of I(J(A) ill that one must allow for the eventuality 
          of A,I(J(A)  or J., being unbounded.  As usual,  the  component  function.  of 
          I(J  will be denoted  by 1fJl, ••• , I(J", 80  that  l(J(x) = (lfJl(x), ••• , 1(J.(x»  for  all 
          x E  A and J., - det( := ). 
               (1)  The  theorem  is  true  if  I(Js(xs, ••• , x,,), ••• , IfJ,.(Xl, ••• ,z,.)  are  a 
          permutation  of Xs, ••• ,x".  I<'or if lfJl(x), ..• , I(JII(X) are  just  Xl,  ••• ,x.,  but 
          poaaibly in a different order,  then J., is the determinant  of an n X n square 
          array  that  baa precisely one 1 in each  row and  each column,  with  all the 
          other elements zero, 80 that J., = :1. Thus the statement  is a direct conse-
          quence of the definition of the integral,  which does not depend  on the order 
          in which the coordinates  are taken. 
                (2)  We may &ll8ume that  the theorem  is true  for n - 1 in place of n, 
          if n  > 1. For suppoae we prove  the theorem  under  this  &88umption. Then 
          if we prove  the  theorem  for n - 1 it will be true  for n - 2, lince  true  for 
          n - 2 it will be true for n - 3, since true for n - 3 it will be true for n - 4, 
          etc.,  80 the theorem  will hold for all n. 
                (3)  It is sufficient  to  prove  the  theorem  when 1 is continuous.  For 
          suppoae it is known in this special case. Then given an arbitrary  I: I(J(A) -+ R 
          which is zero outside  a compact  subset  of I(J(A) and integrable  on I(J(A) we 
          must show that  fA UOI(J) IJ.,I exists and is equal to  J.,IA)/. Let DC I(J(A) 
          be a compact set such that I is zero outside D. Apply the previous corollary 
          to D and I(J(A) to get a continuous  function  l/!: E" -+ (0,1)  that  is 1 on D 
          ..  X. 1CVL'l'1P .... INTIIORALI 
          _d 0 outside a compact mbeet D' of cp(A). Let 1 he a closed interval in E" 
          tliat contains  the compact set D'V cp-I(D'). For convenience, if F is any 
          function on a suheet of H" we Rhan denote by F the function on g.. which 
          apeea with  F where the  latter  is  defined  and  is  sero  elsewhere. Thua 
          }.CA) 1- /, 1.  Now suppose  we are  Kiven BOrne • > O.  Since  /, 1 ate, 
          the lemma enables ua to find continuous functions (II, (I.: 1- R such  that 
          (l1(:r;) ~1(:r;) ~ (l1(:r;) for each x Eland  J, {(I. - (II) < t.  Then  t/t(X)(lI(:r;) ~ 
         l(x)  St/t(X)(lI(Z)  for  each  Z Eland  J, (I/IU' - "I) ...  J, t/t<us - (It} ~ 
          J, <us - (It} < t. U we let II, II be the restrictions to cp(A) of iii, ~ respec-
          tively,  then 11,1. are continuous  real-valued  functions on cp(A) which are 
          I8l'O  outside  D',il(:r;) ~ I(x)  ~ 11(:r;) for each :r; E  cp(A), and  f~A)(J1 - It} 
          < •. Now consider the  real-valued  functions  on A  given by  (flo,,)IJ.I, 
          (f. ° .,) I J.I and  (f 0 cp) I J.I ; the  tint  two are continuoua, they  are all sero 
          outside cp-l(D'), and they satisfy 
                      «(flocp)IJ.I)(x)     S «(focp)IJ.I)(x)  S  «(f.ocp)IJ.I)(:r;) 
          for aU xE A. Thus U;;;-cp)IJ.1 and  (f.ocp)IJ.1  are continuous on E- and 
                           (110 ,,) IJ .. I<x) S  (fo cp) IJ.I (x)  S (flO cp) IJ.I (:r;) 
          for all x E  1. By asaumption  our theorem  holds for II and II, BO that 
                  /'«(I,ocp)IJ.I-      (flo cp) IJ.I>  -  fA  «(f,o,,)IJ.I-      (flO cp) IJ.I) 
                                                        - LCA) (fl - il) < •. 
          Since. was an arbitrary  positive number, the lemma implies that (10 cp) IJ.I 
           is integrable on 1. Thus  (focp)IJ.1  is integrable on A. Furthermore,  from 
           the inequalities 
                LCA)/,,"" L (flocp)IJ .. 1 S fA (focp)lJ .. 1 S fA (flocp)IJ.I-           LeA)/a 
           and 
           we deduce that 
                             I L (focp)IJ.I-       LA,!I S LCA) (fl-/l)  < t. 
           This being true for all f  > 0, we have 
                                           fA (focp)IJ.I-      f~A'!' 
           proving  the  contention  of this  section  of the  proof. Therefore  from now 
           on we may 8118Ume I to be continuous. 
                          (4)  If  (A.I.e.  is a  collection  of open  subsets  of ... euch  u.t A -
                 V  A. and  for each It E  8  the  theorem  is true  for  A. aod the l'eItricUon 
                eE' 
                of "  to A .. then  the  theorem  is true  for A and  ". For let /: ,,(A) -                                                                  R be 
                a continuoue  function  that  is aero outaide the compact  sublet  D of ,,(A). 
                 (,,(A.)}.e.  ie a  collection  01 open  eubeets  of  ,,(A)  whoee union  is .,(A). 
                By  the  proposition  continuoue  functioDl "'h ... , '/I,,: ... -                                                         (0, 1)  may  be 
                found  euch that  '/Il(Z) + ... + ",,,(Z) - 1 lor  each  zED aod each '/I, ie 
                zero  outside  a  compact  subset  of  ,,(A'h,»,  for  lOme .(t)  E 8.  For  each 
                i ... 1, ... , N  we  have 
                        f"(A)  '/1;/-. £(A,(I)  '/1;/- £0(11 «'/I;/)o,,)lJ.,I-                                             L. «",;/)o,,)IJ.,I. 
                                       " 
                 Since 1 ==  E '/Id, we deduce 
                                     1_1                      ""                                                " 
                                f.       1 -       f.        E "';/ - E 1  "';/ - E 1 «"'4) 0 ,,) IJ.,I 
                                  .,(A)              ~A) _1                      _I  .,(A)                     _I  A 
                                                           it 
                                             ... L E «'/I4)o")IJ,,I- L (fo,,)IJ.,I, 
                 which was to be shown. 
                          (5)  The theorem  ie true  for n - 1. To prove true we may suppoee A 
                 to be an open interval,  by (4).  Let 1 be a continuoue  real-valued  function 
                 on ,,(A)  that  is zero outside  lOme compact  subset  of .,(A).  The function 
                10" is zero outside  lOme compact  subset  of A, 10  we can  find 0, b E A, 
                 o < b,  luch  that  J 0" is  zero on  A - (a, b).  Then  /  ie  aero  on  .,(A)  -
                 ,,«(a, b». In the present  case J" - ,,', and einee this is nowhere aero " muet 
                 be either  an increasing  function  on  A or a decreasing  funcUon. In either 
                  case we go back to the change of variable  theorem  for One variable  (C0rol-
                 lary  3 of the  fundamental  theorem  of ca1culue). If" is increuina,  then 
                                   (1-1                           1- f.tJ(t)/-{(fo,,),,'-l  (fo")lJ,,I. 
                                  h(A)'               "aN))                  ~.).                                             A 
                 If "  is decreasing  the computation  il 
                                                                                                         0                            0 
                                  f.       / .. f.                / - r<-) / - r. (f  ,,).,'  -                             {CJ ,,)( -",) 
                                    ,(A)               ,,« • .tI)          ltJ(t).                                            • 
                                                                      -L (fo,,)IJ,,(· 
                  TbiI provee the theorem  lor n - 1. Therefore lrom now on we may ...ume 
                  that n > 1. 
                           (6)  The  theormo  is  true  if  lor  certain  i, j  - I, ••• , a  we  bave 
                  ".(ZI,  .•• , %,0)  -             ZJ. By virtue  of (1), it eufBceI to prove this in the epeciaI 
                  case where i - j  - 1, that is 
                                      ,,(ZI,  ••• , z.)  -             (ZI, .,.(zs, .•• , %,0), ••• , .,. (Zl. • •• , :r..». 
           ...     X.  IIUL'l'IPLIIIJI'I'IICI&ALe 
           A is a UDion of open interva.1a of E-, for any point 01 A ia the center of an 
           open ball that is _tirely  contained  in A, and an open ball of radius r con-
           tUna the open interval  haviOl  the  lIIlme center  and  aides 2r/ yn. Thus 
           by  (.)  we may  UIUJIle that  A  ia itAlelf an  open  interval.  Identifyinl  E-
           with.  X B-1, we have A - B X C, where B and C are open intervalt  in 
           •  and  B-1 respectively.  Let J: .,(A) -                B be.a  continuous  funotion  that 
           is  ...,  outaide a  compact  aubeet  of  cp(A) C B X B-1.  The  funotion 
           I: B X B-l-+ B which  .... with J on .,(A)  and othenriae II HI'O  II 
           oootioUOUl. For each s E B, the function/ca):  B-l-+R  liven  by Ic-)VI) -
           I(s, ,) is continuoua  and ia IeI'O  outlide  a compact aubeet of B-1,  hence 
           lntecrable  on B-1, 10 we have 
                                                             d 
                                       I.tA)J - I.xr- - I. (/ ..... ·1), 
           where /.-.1  denote.  the  function  on  B  whoeevalue  at  s  is / .....  1(.). 
            For any s E B CODIider the function  CPc-l: C -                    B-1 which is  defined  by 
                       CPc.)(.zs, ... , z.)  -  (",(s,  St,  ... , z.),  ... , ",,(s, St,  ... , s.» 
           for all  (St, ••. , s.) E C. CPC-) is a  one-one continuously  differentiable  map 
            whoee jacobian 1 'Ic-' ia (I.) '-" that  is for  each  (St, ••• , s.) E C  we  have 
           1 'Ic-'(St, ••• , s.) -    I.(s,  St,  ••• , z.).  Since our  theorem holds  for  ,,- 1 
            (by (2»,  we can compute 
                 I ..... lc-) -   /'Ic-)cC)JC-) -   /Q (/c-)oCP(a)IJ'Ic-,I- IQ  (Uocp)IJ.l)ca), 
            10 that 
            Therefore                       I.cA)J-/. (lc(Jocp)II.I). 
            Now (/ocp) 11.1  is a  continuous  real-valued  function  on  B X C that.  is 
            IeI'O  outBide a compact  sublet  of B X C, hence integrable  on B X Cj alto, 
            for  each  sEB  the function  «Jocp)IJ:.I)C-)  is a  continuous  real-valued 
            function on C that is IeI'O outside  a coinpact.aubeet  of C, hence int.ear&ble 
            on C. Therefore  the laat iterated  intearal  equals  I.xc (J 0 cp) 1 J" I. Thus  we 
            indeed have 
             in our epecial cue. 
                   (7)  We  now  prove  the  theorem.  For  any  point  0  E  A  we  hava' 
            1.(0)  ... 0,10  that.  ::: (0) ... 0 for at. leut  one i-I,  ... , n. For given i, 
            the 8Ubeet of A where atpal aSj iB not zero iB open and the union of these ft 
            subsets  iB A, 80 by (4) it 8uffices to prove the theorem  for each one of these 
            subeets.  Therefore  lYe may 88IIWlle that atpalas, is never zero on A. By (1), 
            we mayauume  that i ... R,  that iB afP.las. is never  zero on A. Now con-
            Bider the map 17: A - E- defined by 
            The jacobian 01 17 iB IJfP.IIJs., which it never aero, 10 by the invel'lle function 
            theorem each point G E A iB contained  in an open lubeet  A. of A 8uch that 
            the  reamction  of 17  to  A. iB a one-one  map  from  A. onto  an open  subset 
            17(A.) of E- and  such  that  the  map  rl: 17(A.) -                            A. iB also  continuouely 
            differentiable.  Again  by  (4), it suffices to prove  the  theorem  for each  A •. 
            Thus  we may 888ume that  the  map 17: A - E- is a one-one map  frorp  A 
            onto  the open subset  17(A) of E- and  that  rl: 17(A) _  A is also continu-
            ously  differentiable.  The  map  T" fP 0 rl is  therefore  a  one-one  con-
             tinuously  differentiable  map  from  17(A) onto  fP(A), and  fP - TO 17.  The 
             maps 17 and  T are such that  if S = (Sl, •.. , s.) E A, then  17(S) = (Sl, "', 
            Sa-l, tpa(s»  and  T(Sl, ... , Sa-I, tpa(s»  -=  (fPl(s), •.. , tpa(s».  By  (6),  the 
             theorem  holds for the map 17 of A, provided  J. iB nowhere zero on A, and 
             also for the map T of 17(A), providedJ~ is nowhere zero on 17(A). Therefore 
             for any  continuous  func~on I: fP(A) -                       E- that  is zero outside  a  compact 
             subset  of fP(A) we have,  provided  J. and J~ are nowhere zero, 
                  l.tA)l-/'c.(A))/-/.(A) (JOT) IJ,I- IA «UOT)lJ.1)  0 17)IJ.1 
                                              .. IA (JofP)I(J~o17)J.I· 
             The theorem  will therefore  be proved if we can show that 
                                                            J. - (J. ° 17)J. 
             at each point  of A. Por those  who know linear  algebra  thiB equality  iB an 
             immediate  consequence of the last paragraph  of the first section of Chapter 
             IX (Bince the determinant  of the product  of two linear  transformations is 
             the  product  of the  determinants),  but  it is possible  to  give a  more  "ele-
             mentary"  proof,  as  followa. Since  fP = T 0 17,  for  auy  i, j  ==  1, ... ,ft  the 
             chain rule giVeB                                  .                   .  .. 
                                 (~); ... «T017Mi  - (T,017), -= E «T')~017)(17,,)i 
                                                                                  .-1 
                                         _  {  (T,); ° 17 + «TJ~ ° 17)(fP.);  if j  < ft 
                                                 «TI): 017)(tpa)~                           if j  -   ft. 
         lIM    X.  IIO'LTIPLII  INTI!IORALB 
                       .. 
         Thus  the  "  X "  square  array  «/Pi);) is obtained  from  the" X "  square 
         array  «or,); ocr) &8 follows: if j  < " then  each element  of the j" column of 
         the former equals the corresponding  element of the j" column of the latter 
         plus (tp,,), times  the corresponding  element  of the "" column of the latter, 
         while each element  of the ,,"  column of the former equals  (tp,,)! times  the 
         corresponding  element  of the ,,"  column of the latter.  By the elementary 
         properties  of determinants  we have 
                                det «/Pi)j) = det «Ti)/ocr).  (tp,,)!, 
         that is, 
                                            J" = (J.ocr)J., 
         which is precisely what remained  to be shown. 
         PROBLEMS 
           1.  Let  II, ... , IN be disjoint  open  intervals  in E". Show that If J., .. . ,J" are 
              open intervals  in E" BUch that 
                                    I.V ... VINCJIV  .. • VJ" 
              then      vol(Ia)  + ... + vol (1.)  S  vol (J.) + ... + vol (J II). 
           2.  Can you give a I .. computational &J'IUIDeJ)t for Example 3 of • 1 T 
           3.  Prove  that  a  continuous  real-valued  function  on  a  closed interval  in  B- is 
              intep'able,  using only Lemma 1 of • 2 and uniform continuity. 
           4.  Do  the  n-dimensional  generalisation  of  Problem  6,  Chapter  VI,  with [0, b) 
               replaced by a c1011ed interval  1 of E- and  L· J(z)dz by  /,J. 
           5.  Write  down in all detail  the  proof of the fint  proposition of  • 2. 
           6.  Let I be a real-valued function  on a BUbeet A of E". Show that if  fAI exiate, 
               then 10 doee fA III, and I L II < L III· (Him: FInt U8UIIle  that A is a c10aed 
               interval.) 
           7.  (a>  Let I be a real-valued function on a cloeed interval  1 of B-. Bhow that If 
                   I is integrable  on 1 then  80 ia/'. 
               (b)  Let I. , be real-valued functions on a closed interval!  of B-. Bhow that if 
                   I and ,  are integrable on 1 then 10 ia/,. 
               (e)  Let I., be real-valued functiona on a BUbeet A of E". Show that  if  fAI 
                    and L, exist. then  fA I, exists. 
                Cd)  Let I be a real-valued function on a BUbaet A of B- and let B C A. Show 
                    that If fAI exists and B has volume, then  f.1 exiate. 
                                                                                   PIKIBLZMS     J45 
               (e)  Show that  if the subsets A and B of E" have volume, then 80 do the sets 
                    A flB,  A VB and A-B. 
           8.  Show that if a subset ACE" baa volume, then the interior of A  (of. Prob. 16, 
               Chap. III)  baa the same volume. 
           9.  Show that  a bounded 8ubset A of E" has volume if and only if the boundary 
               of A  (d.  Pl'oh. 17, Chap. III)  haR volume sero. 
          10.  Let f be a bounded real-valued function on a closed interval  1 of E". Prove 
               that  f  is integrable on 1 if and  only if, for any  e, 6 > 0,  1 is the union of a 
               finite set  of  closed ~ubintervals such  that  the  sum of the  volumes of those 
               subintervals on which f varies by at least e is less than  B. 
          11.  Let. f be a bounded r('.al-valued funcUon on a cloAed interval  1 of E". Prove 
               that. fiR  integrahle on 1 if and only if, for each e > 0, the Bet of points of 1 at 
               which the osdllation of f (cf. Prob. 5, Chap. IV) is at least • baa volume sero. 
          12.  US!' the preceding problem to show that  a bounded real-valued function I on 
               a c1oSl'd interval I  of Eft is integrable on 1 if and only if the Bet of points of 1 
               at which f i~ not continuoufl is the union of a sequence of subeets of 1 of volume 
               zero. 
          13.  Show that  the  nonempty  subset of (0,1\  consisting of thOle numbel'll which 
               have derimall'xpanflionR none of whose dilits  is 6 i8 the let of ita on clueter 
               pointPI. Show that thill set is of volume lero.  . 
          14.  For each intl'ger n> 1 let 8" be the union of the OllCll ball,  in  R of C8ntel'll 
                l/n,2/n,  ... , (n - 1 )/71 and radii l/n2-+ I Prove that      V    8.  I,  an  open 
                                                              •             .-1,1 ...... 
               subRet of [0, II without  volum('. (Hint:  If this  set  had  volume, the  volume 
               would be  I.  But  th(' union  of any  finite number  of  8,,'s  baa  volume  less 
               than  1/2.) 
          15.  Let  A c Eft and let f: A --0 E"'.  Consider the  condition that  there  exist some 
               MER such that d{j(x),  f(y»  ~ Afd(x,,,)  for all x,,, E A. 
                (II.)  Show that  the  ('ondition ill flBtisfied if I  is the  restriction  to  A of some 
                    differentiable map into E'" of some open subset of E" containing A, if the 
                     partial derivatives of the component functions of I are bounded on A and 
                     A ('ontainR the entire line S!'gment between any two of its pointe. 
                (b)  Show that  if  the  condition is satisfied, if  m - ft,  and vol (A)  - 0, then 
                     vol (f(A»  >= O. (Hint: A is contained in the union of a finita Dumber of 
                     cubes of total  volume less than any prescribed positive number.) 
                (c)  Show that  if the condition is satisfied, if m > n, and  A is bounded then 
                     vol (f(A»  - O. (Contrast  with Prob. 31, Chap. IV.) 
           16.  Prove that  if ACE" has positive volume and I is a positive-valued functioD 
                on A such that  fA f exists, then  fA f > O. (Hint: Reduce to the caae where A is 
                a cloRed interval and for any positive e we have vol (Ix E A : lex) ~ .1)  - 0, 
                then try to use compactness.) 
           17.  Let AcE" be a set with volume and f: A --0 R a continuous function. Show 
                that.  if  the  S!'t  Ix E  A : f(x)  =  01  has  volume  zero, then  the  Bet  Ix E  A : 
                f(z)  > 01  has volume. 
          1M  X.  .VLTJ'~ IIf'I'BOIlAUI 
           18.  Let  A be a bolUlded aublet  of B" aDd II, I., I., . .. a eequence of real-valued 
                funetions  on A that  converges uniformly  to the limit function  I. Show that if 
                [  I. exists for all tn,  then  11 exists, and  (  I - lim  (  I •. Is this true if A 
                  .t                              .t                J.      • .... J .. 
                   not bounded?                                            . 
           II.  1M A C B- be compact aDd have 'VOlume, let U C B be open, and let I be a 
                ClODUnUOUS real-vaIued functioD OIl the eet 
                              f(SI, ... ,s.,,)  eB-+l:  (Sa, ... ,s.)  eA"e UI. 
                Prove that if '1/'" uiate  and ill ClObtinuoua OIl the latter eet, then 
                                       ! il(S, ,) a - i ~ (s, ,) a. 
           m.  Let. v C B- be 00IIlpaCt aDd have volume and let A aDd K be continuoua naI-
                valued fUDCtio_ OIl V and V X V reapectively.  Show that if 
                                               !vol (V) K(s, r) I < 1 
                lor all s, ,  e V then  there ill a unique  continuoul  real-valued  lunction  "  OIl V 
                IUCh that               rp(s) - A(s) + Iv K(z, ,) rp(r) tlfI 
                 forallse  V. 
           21.  Let F: (0, 1) X (0, 1) -     B  be defined by I(s, ,) - 0  if :r aDd fI are  not. both 
                 rational, while 1(S, ,) - 1/, if s aad , are rational and 9 is the amaIlest p0si-
                 tive intepr  BUcb that fZ ill an intepr.  Show that 
                                                                             /
                          1 ... 1Ix ... /(S,,)  t&tlr - 0  but  1 .... (f"'II (S,')  tlr) a 
                 ill not de&oed. What about I .... (/"'11 I (:r, ,) a) tlfl? 
           2t.  Compute                 1 / ~ .... _a+w+~. s". .. a tlr .. 
            23.  Cbanp the order of intepatiOD in 
                                r. (J.~.I'"(J.'lI-......... I'J4 /(z, fI, ,) tlz) dr) a 
                 (five aoawera). 
            II.  8bcnr that if (a, 6J ill a cloaed interval In It and I: (a, 61  X (G, 61- B .. contln-
                 uoua, tlaeD     r. (t I(:r, fI) d,) a  - r. (L'/(Z, II) dJ:) dll . 
            .. Compute 
                      vol «((:r"  ••• , s.) e" : 0 < :r"  ••• ,:r .. and :r, + ...  +:r" S  11). 
            t8.  Let V. be the volume of the clot!ed unit. ball in B-, that  is, the set 
                                    H:r., ... ,~) eB-: :r,I+ ... +~I S 11. 
                  Show that if ,. > 1 then V. - 2 V ....... /.' (1 - tI)I"-'I/'  dt, and  bence  (applying 
                  Prob.  39, Chap.  VII)  that  V .. -  (211'/ft) V ...... if ft > 2. 
                                                                                                         PBOBLB118         ~7 
            'D.  Let A c E-, BeE",  let J and fI be integrable  real-valued functions on A aDd 
                  B respectively, and let 1r .. and 1r. be the projections of AX B onto its factors, 
                  that  is 1r .. (z,1I) ,. z and  "'.(Z,II)  ... 11  if Z E A and  11 E B. Show that 
                                           Lx. (J 0  1r..}{fJ 0  .... )  -   (£/)(/. (I). 
                   (Hint:  Problem 7 can simplify the proof.) 
            28.  Let ACE- and B C 8-. Show that 
                   (a)  if A and  B have  volume,  then  (by  Problem  27) 
                                                vol (A X B) - vol (A) vol (B) 
                   (b)  if vol (A X B) exists and  is nonaero, then  A and B have volume 
                   (c)  if vol (A X B) - 0 then  A or B baa volume lero. 
            29.  Prove thlt  under  the  conditions  of the change  of variable  theorem,  ip maps 
                   any  aubaet of A that  is t.'Ontained in a compact  liUbret of A and  has  volume 
                   onto a subset of ,,(A)  that  has volume. 
            30.  Prove  that if J it a real-valued function  on E' such that.  Irl exists, then 
                                  Ir (z,1I) dz d1l -         1~.t9S .. /(r COl 6, r sin 6) r dr dB. 
                                      /
                   (Hint:  First  prove  thil  if I is zero on lOme open subset  of E' containing  the 
                   positive z-axis. Problem 7(d) can help in l)assin~ to the general case.) 
             31.  (a)  Ulle Problem 30 to show that for any Ie > 0 we have 
                            l          ,-rI r dr dB ... 1             r.a-".  dz dll < L                ,-all-Wi  dz d/l 
                             ~II                            ~-'~                              ··wElO.tl 
                                                      <  (             ,-ao-w- dJ: dy -       (        _ ,-rI , dr dB. 
                                                          }o<...                             }D<r<.J.VI 
                                                            .T+Wll94"                         oS,S·1I 
                    (b)  Deduce that                                   d 
                                         1(1-rtl) < (Ie'r th}1 < i( 1 - rW). 
                                           (+-                 v'r 
                    (c)  Prove that}.            e-·· dz - 2          (cf. Prob.  28, Chap.  VI). 
             32.  Let A be an open subset of E- and 1 a real-valued fuuction on A. Let :D be the 
                    llet 01 compact  lIubaebs of A  th&t have  volume. Cadi J abaolutel/l integrable on 
                    A if ID 1 exiatl for each D E :D and there is a number  L E  R such that  for any 
                    • > 0 there exilts  lOme D E :D web that if D' E  :D and  D' ::::> D then 
                                                                I ID,f - L I < 4!. 
                    (a)  Show that  if L exists, it is unique.  (Hence we may write 
                                                               L ... 1;""1.) 
                    (b)  Show that  if  IA 1 exists, then  I: 1= 1 .. /. (IIi,,,:  Problem 7(d)  impliCij 
                           that  ID I exists for all D E :D.) 
            M         X.  IIUIIl'I.LII  UIftOBAJA 
                   (0)  Show that if  /DI exists for all DEI),  then I HI ablolutel)' intepoable on 
                          A if and only if for any • > 0 there exiate IOII1fI DEI) IIleh tIW if D' E I) 
                          and D' C A - D then  I /D,J I < e, which is true if and only  if the lit 
                          I 1.1 : DEI) 1 HI bounded, and this in tum II true if aDd onl7 if the lit 
                          f /. III : Del)I is bounded. (Note that  I. III .... '01' all Del), bJ 
                          Problem 8.> 
                   (d)  Show that if f HI continUOUl and I and A are bounded then I; I am.. 
                   <e>  Let (a,6) be an open interval in R and let I be a continuoue rea1-valued 
                          function  on  I z E R : a < z S 6J.  Show  that  if  l: f  alate  then 
                            (Yo  1_ J.' fez) dz (01. Prob. 71, Chap. VI), and that iff takes on only 
                           }e_             e+ 
                          nonneptive values and  /; f(z)  dz uiIta  then  J: f.u.iIta. 
                    (I)   Leta E R, A - Iz E R: z > aJ,  and let f be a contiDuoua real-valued 
                          runction on  I z E R : z ~ al. Show that  if  /;1 exists then  /; f-
                           /. .... /(Z)  dz  (01.  Prob. 28, Chap. VI), and that  ill takes on only __ . 
                           nepUve values and /. .... fez) dz exiate then /;1 exiate. 
                    ~) Show that  J.+--: z dz exiata, but  /: iii: z cis does not. 
     Suggestions  for 
     Further  Reading 
     Ahlfors,  Lars  V.  Compln  Analym.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill  Book 
        Company,  1953; Second FAfition, 1966. 
     Apllstol,  Tom  M.  Mathematicol Analyai.:  a  modern approacl& Co ~ 
        calculu •.  Reading,  Ms..:  Addison-Wesley Publishing  Company,  Inc., 
        1957. 
     Bart.le, Robert  G. The Element. oj Real Analyai •. New York: John Wiley & 
        Sons, Inc.,  1964. 
     Boas, Ralph P., Jr.  A Primer oj Real Fuftdione.  New York: John Wiley 4: 
        Bons, Inc.,  1960. 
     Buck,  R.  Creighton.  Advanced CalculUi.  New  York:  MeGraw-Hill  Book 
        Company,  1956; Second Edition,  1965 .. 
     Dicudonn~, Jean.  Foundotiona 0/ Modem Analysia.  New York: Academic 
        PreBS, 1960. 
     Gleason,  Andrew M. Fundamenlala oj AbetTact Anal" ... Readinc. M ... : 
        Addison-Wesley Publishing  Company,  Inc.,  1966. 
     Goldberc,  Richard  R.  MeUaod. oj  Real Anal"si •.  New  York:  BIaiedeU 
        Publishing  Company,  1964. 
     Halmos,  Paul  R.  No'We Set Theory. Princeton,  N.J.:  D.  Van  NOIltrand 
        Company,  Inc.,  1960. 
      Landau, Edmund.  Foundationa oj Anal"ai •.  New York: Chellea Publiahing 
        Company,  1951. 
     Royden,  H. L. Real Analyaia. New York: The Macmillan Company,  1963. 
     Rudin,  Walter.  Principle.  oj MatMmatical  Analyai •. New York: McOraw-
        Hill Book Company,  1953; Second Edition,  1964. 
     Spivak,  Michae.1. CalculUi OR  Mani./oltU: •  modem approcreA 10 dtutict;al 
        tlaeorem. oj adwJnced c:alculUi. New York: W. A. Benjamm,  IDe •• 1985. 
         Index 
         AbIOIute value, 22, 03                      Com)llld 
         Abeoiuteiy _verpat  ..... 144                   metric ip&OI,  a. 
         AbIOIutely iDteanbIe, ~7                        I8qU8lltially,  81 
         AcIctitioD, 18                                  lit, It 
         Additive iDv..,  18                         Compuiloo  t.-t,  1" 
         Agrept.e,2                                  Complement, 6 
         AIpbra,  fundamental theorem of, 1M         Complet.e metric ..,..,  62 
         AlterDatia,..-.   145                       Complex 
         ADtiderivative,  127                            DOI'med vector 1J*I8, ~ 
         Arcwlae connected, 93                           Dumben,30 
         Area, 112, 113, m                               Dumber a)'8tem, 30 
         Auooiativlty,  18                           Component function, 77 
                                                     Compoeed funoticm, 9 
                                                     eo...po.ition  01 fUDClt.ioDa, 9 
         Ball, 87                                    Connected 
              ebed, 87                                   metric ..,..,  69 
              opeD,  87                                  .... 
         Between, 80                                 Coutant functioD, 8tI 
         Binomial                                    ContinUOUl 
              ...,183                                    IUDCtIaa, 88 
              theorem, 110                               uailarmly,  80 
         Bound                                       ContinUClUlly diI ... t4bIe, 198 . 
             .. ten lower, 21                        Contraction map, 171 
              Ieut upper, D                          CODY8rII,41,88,I'l 
              10 .. ,21                                  absolutely, 144, 160 
         _    upper, D                                   at a point,  141 
         Boundary,  82                                   uniformly,  81, 1'1 
         Bounded                                     CoDY8rIIDC8 
              fWlCtioD, 78                                iDterval 01, In 
                                                          radiUl 01, In 
              ~'7                                    CoDY8rIIDt 
              IIt,Q                                      I8qU8llCll,  41 
              totally,  81                                I8qU8llCll  01 funot.lolUl. 88 
                                                          --.141 
                                                     CoDvex funotion, 110 
          Calculue, luadamental  dJeorem of, 128     CorreIpoad, 8 
          Cart.-iua  produot,  7                     CorreIpcmde_,oM-Oll8,10 
          Cauchy  __ value theorem,  109             CoIeaant,  103 
          Cauchy 1Iq1IIIlOII,  II                    CoIiDll, 117 
          Center,  87                                Cotanpnt,  103 
          CltaiD rule,  102-101, 1t18, .1            Curve, 83, 1M 
          ChaDp 01 variable in intqrat.ioD,  128, 239     1eqth0l  .. 1~ 
          ClO88Cl                                         ..,..,.1iIliJII, 1M 
              baII,87 
              iDterva1, 88, t3 
              .t, 40                                 DeoImal 
          CIoIure, U                                      expuwiOD,27 
          a..- poiat, II                                  8DitAt,28 
          CaIleatiaD, 2                                   iD8aite,27 
          Commutativity,  18                              periodic, 31 
          _      IlfDD 
          Decreuinl                                        Function  (cont.) 
               funetion,  105                                   increui ....  106 
               aaqllellClt, 110                                 Intepable,  112, 218 
          Deue, 93                                              Invene,IO,  178, 211 
          Derivative,  98, 100                                  limit, 83 
               partial,  169, UM                                limit  01, 72, 73 
               I8CIOIId, third, 108                             Ii_,. 
               IIOOnd, third order partial,  201                loprlthmio,  128 
          Diameter, 92                                          nowhere ditrerentiable,  111&-187 
          DItr_tlable,  98, 196, 212                            one-one, ~to-oDe, 10 
               at a point,  98, 196                             onto,  10 
               continuously, 198                                Rep, 70, 119, 222 
               "ti-,l08                                         Itrietly  dlcreuinlo  1011 
               OIl  a lilt,  100                                I&rictIy IncreuInIo 1011 
          Dltrerential equation,  177ff.                        tripnometrio,  lli7,  183, 1M 
          Differential operator, 203                            uniformly  continUO\ll, 80 
          Dltrerentiation,  98                             Fundamental theorem 
               under &he int.eKralllip,  169, 2f6               01 alaebra, 185 
          Dlejoint",8                                           01 calculUl, 128 
          DIetanee, 34 
               between functiona,  87-90, 91i 
               from a point to a let, 92                   Geometric lllriel,  1<&2 
          Diltributivity,  18                              Graph,  8, 9 
          Diftrp,  141                                     Greater than,  19 
          Dinrpnt --. 1'1                                  GreateIt  lower bound,  2Ii 
          Dummy ftI'Iable, 48, 113 
          Element,  2                                       Harmonic  --. Ita 
               neutral,  18 
          Empty lilt,  ,                                    Identity  function,  10,70 
          EnMmble,2                                         lIMP, 10 
          Euelidean ~, 3'                                   Implicit  function  theorem, 17',_ 
          Euler eonatant, 134                               Improper  int.eKral, 131, 181i, 2f8 
          Exponent., exponential,  21-22                    InonuInl 
          Exponential  function,  129                            functioa, 105 
               complex,IM                                        lllClueDOe,1IO 
           Extremitiee  01 an interval, 38, 218-217         Indlxinl:  family, 8 
                                                            Indlcel,  8 
           Family,2                                         InllDWD, 2Ii 
           Field,  18                                       Infinite 
           Finite                                                decimaI,27 
               decimal,  28                                      aequence, 11 
               18\ 11                                            ....,141 
           Fixed point, 171                                      lilt,  11 
                                                            Intepr,21 
                tbeorem, 170                                     )IOIitive, 10 
           Funetion,8                                       Intearable,  112, 218, 2M 
                bounded, 78                                      abeoIutely, ~7 
                eomponeat, 77                                    LeIJeIpe, 118 
                eompolllld, 9                                    IUlmnann,112,218 
                COIIBtaat,89                                Inteanl,  112, 218 
                contin-.  88                                     improper,  135, 185,2f8 
                tIOIltinuoully differentiable, 198               iterated, 231 
                COII-mc, 110                                     LebeIpe,  118 
                deereuin& 1011                                   Riemaun,  112, 218 
                differentiable, 98, 100, 195                Intepal  equation,  178, 181, 192 
                ezponeot.ial,l28                            InteKrai  teIt,  181 
                ideatity,  10,70                            Intaior,82 
                implicit, 17" -                                  point,  82. 
                                                                                       INDD      .. 
          Intermediate  value theorem, 82, 83 
          Int.erM!etion, 4, 6 
          Interval 
               c1oeed, 38, 43 
               half-open, 42 
               of converpnoe,  U52 
               open, 38, 43 
          In ... 
               additive, 16 
               function, 10, 176, 211 
               bnap,  10 
               multiplicative, 16                        Natural  number,  10. 11 
          Iterated  intepoal, 231                        tHIimeDIional EucIideua ......  M 
                                                         HiIll8llliona1  volume, 1M 
                                                         Neptlve,  III 
          Jacobian,  211                                 N_ted lilt properi7, II 
               determinant,  211                         Neutral  elementl,  1. 
               matrix,  200                              Newt.oe'. metbod, 1. 
          Jordan  meuure,  224                           Norm, 63 
                                                         Normed vector ......  63 
                                                         Nowhere dilFerentiable 1\1DCItIae, lee- l67. 
                                                         tt-tuple, 11 
                                                          Number,  1. 
                                                              eompIu,ao 
          Leut upper bound, 23                                natural,  10, 21 
          Lebee&ue                                            neptive, 10 
               inf.ep'able,  116                              oI __ tI ia • -. 11 
               intesraJ,116                                   pcIIIitive, 10 
          Len&th, 224                                         ratloDal, 21 
               of a curve, 1M                                 real, 16 
          Lela than,  10 
          L'Hoepital'.  rule,  109-110                    Objeat, I 
          Limit                                           On"16 
               functlon,83                                <>-one, .. to-oDe, 10 
               inferior, 63                               Onto, 10 
               of • function,  72-73                      Opea 
               of • -lCquence, 46                              ball, 37 
               IUperior, 83                                    iaterval,  18,43 
          Line IlellMDt  bet_ two pointl, 83                   -.89 
          Linear                                          Order, 10 
               difFerential equation, 189, 100            Ordered pair, 7 
               functJon, 09                               0eeIDati0a, 01 
               tranlformation,  93 
           LiplChiti COIldition, 178, 183 
          Lopritbmle  function, 128 
          Lo_ bound, 25 
           Map,S 
               contraction, 171 
           Mappin" 8 
           max, 24 
           Maximum, 78 
           Mean nlue theorem, 105 
               Cauchy, 109 
               for intepals,  133 
               for IIIITeral  ftl'iablel,  2CK-205 
           Member,2 
           Metric, M 
                                                        Set. (eoat.) 
                                                             CICIDIII!CtecI, 69 
                                                             diajoil¢,  6 
                                                             empty,. 
                                                             iIlit.e,ll 
                                                             ia&Dite,11 
                                                             opea,.39 
                                                         SiDe, 167 
                                                         8pace-fiIUDI curve, M 
          RadiuI, fR                                     Square fOO\ 118 
              ~eoa .......  l52                          Step fllllClb, TO, UI, 222 
          "'..,141                                       INrIia(I  formula,  181 
          lWIaDal ..........  11                         8VlatIt cIeareuiDa. 106 
          ...                                            Strictq IDenuiDa. 106 
              auaber,lI                                  SubiDt4'Ya1, 21 .. 217 
              ..... .,..,11                              Sut.queaae. 46 
          BIItiriatioa, I                                Sublet, a 
          R.ieIMDD                                            proper,4 
              iDtesrabJe. 112, 218                       8ubBpace, 31 
              iD ......  U2,21.                          s.-ive approllimaUoo, 119, 170 
              -.112,21'                                  Sum ~ a 1MIriee, 1.1 
          Rolle', tIIeonm, 1M                            Supremum, 25 
          RocK teat, 112 
                                                         Tr.qeat,  91, 108 
                                                         Taylor 1eI'iea, 1M 
                                                         Taylor',  theorem, 107, 21M 
                                                         Totally bouDjled, 66 
                                                         TranaitiYity(20 
                                                         'I'rir.qle  iDequality, M 
                                                         Trichotomy,19 
                                                         Tri&oDometric fuactiou,  157, 108, 1M 
                                                         Uallorm 
                                                              eoa&iDulty, 80 
                                                              eaawrpaoe,  81, 141 
                                                              ODDftI'PIlG8 of improper iD .......  lIS 
                                                         Uallormly  COIltiDUOUl  fuocUoa, 80 
                                                         UDloa,4,  6 
                                                          Upper bound, 23 
                                                         V 
                                                           r.lue of a function,  8 
                                                         Volume, 224 
                                                              It-dimeIllJioor.l, 224 
                                                          W r.IIiI' product,  181 
                                                          Width,  112, 218 
                                                          Zero,18 
       A CATALOG  or SELECTED 
         DOVER BOOKS 
      IN SCIENe!  AND MATHEMATICS 
              (II 
                              A CATALOG  OF SELECTED 
                                   DOVER BOOKS 
                        IN SCIENCE  AND MATHEMATICS 
          QUAUTA TIVE THF;ORY OF DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS,  V. V. Nemytakii 
          and V.V. Stepanov.  C1uaic  paduate-level  text by two prominent  Soviet mathe-
          maticians  coven  duaical  diRermtial  equations  u  well u  topolosical  dynamics 
          and eraodic  theory. Bibliopaphies.  525pp. 5!6 Ie 8Ii.              65954-2 Pa. $lo.g5 
          MATRICES  AND UNEAR  ALGEBRA,  Hanl  Schneider  and Georae Phillip 
          Barker.  Balic textbook coven theory of matricel  and itl applications  10 IYlteml of 
          linear  equations  and related topics luch u  determinanta,  eigenvalues  and diRer-
          mtial  equationl.  Numeroul  exerciaea. 452pp. 5J6 Ie &If.           66014-1 Pa. $10.95 
          QUANTUM  THEORY,  David Bohm. This advanced  undergraduate-level  text 
          pramta  the quantum  theory  in terml  of qualitative  and  imapnauve  c:onc:epII, 
          followed  by  lpecific  applications  worked  out  in  mathematical  detail.  Prefacr. 
          Index. 655pp. 5!6lC 8Ii.                                             65969-0 PR. $1!.9S 
          ATOMIC PHYSICS (8th edition),  Max Born. Nobeilaureate'llucid               treatment  of 
          kinetic theory of paes, elementary particles, nuclear alOm, wave-corpuscles. atomic 
          IlrUCture andlpKlrallinea.  much more. Over 40 appendices,  bibliography.  49!ipp. 
          5!6)( 8Ii.                                                           65984-4 Pa. $12.95 
          ELECTRONIC  STRUCTURE  AND THE  PROPERTIES  OF SOUDS:  The 
          PhYlics of the Chemical  Bond,  Walter A. Harrison.  Innovative  text offers baic 
          understandinl  of  the  electtonic  structure  of covalent  and  ionic  IOlids, simple 
          metals,  transition  metal.  and  their  compounds.  Problema.  1980 edition.  582pp. 
          616 Ie 1M.                                                           66021-4 Pa. $15.95 
          BOUNDARY  VALUE  PROBLEMS  OF  HEAT  CONDUCTION,  M.  Neati 
          Olililt.  Systematic, comprehenlive  treatment  of modem mathematical  methods of 
          IOlving  problema  in  heat  conduction  and  diffusion.  Numerous  examples  and 
           problema. Selected refermcea. Appmdicea.  505pp. 5!6lC BIt.          65990-9 Pa. $12.95 
          A SHORT HISTOIlY  OF CHEMISTIlY  (5rd edition),  J.R.  Partington.  C1aaaic 
          exposition  explores orilina of chemiltry,  alchemy, early medical chemiltry,  nature 
          of atmosphere,  theory of "alency,laws  andltructure  of atomic  theory, much more. 
          428pp. ")( 8It. (Available in U.S, only)                              65977-1 Pa. $10.95 
           A HISTOIl Y OF ASTRONOMY,  A. Pannekoek.  Well-balanced,  carefully  rea-
           soned Itudy coven luch lOpia u  Ptolemaic  theory, work of Copernicus,  Kepler. 
           Newton,  Eddington"  work on ltan,  much  more. Illustrated.  Refermcea.  521pp. 
           5!6 Ie iii.                                                          65994-1 PR. $12.95 
           PRINCIPLES  OF METEOIlOLOGICAL  ANALYSIS. Walter J. Saucier. Highly 
           respected,  abundantly  iIIUSlrated clallie  reviews atmO$pheric  variables,  hydro-
           ltalia,  Italic  stability,  various analyaea (scalar, croll-section,  isobaric,  iaentropic. 
           more). For intermediate  meteorology students.  454pp. 616)( 9140  65979-8 Pa. S14.95 
                                  CATALOG  OF DOVER  BOOKS 
           RELATIVITY.  THERMODYNAMICS  AND COSMOLOGY.  Richard  C. Tol-
          man.  Landmark  study extends  thermodynamics  to special. general relativity; also 
          applications  of relativistic  mechanics.  thermodynamics  to coslllological  models. 
          50lpp.  5" x 8!i.                                                       65385-8 Pa. $12.95 
           APPLIED ANAl.YSIS. Corn .. lius Lanczos. Classic work on analysis and design of 
           finite  prOCt'&lles for  approximating    solution  of  analytiul  problems.  Algebraic 
           equations.  matrices.  harmonic  analysis. quadrature  methods.  much  more. 559pp. 
           5" x 81i.                                                              65656·X Pa. $1:01.% 
           SPECIAL RELATIVITY  FOR PHYSICISTS.  G. Stephenson  and C. W. Kilmisler. 
           Concise  elegalll  an:oulll  for nonspecialists.  Lorelllz  transformation.  optical  and 
           dynamical  applications.  more. Bibliography.  l08pp.  516 x 8!i.        65519-9 Pa. $"1.95 
           INTRODUCTION  TO ANALYSIS. Maxwell Rosenlicht.  Unusually  clear. acces· 
           aible  coverage  of  set  theory.  real  number  Iyatern.  metric  apacel.  continuous 
           functions.  Riemann  integration.  multiple  integrals.  more. Wide range of problems. 
           Undergraduate  level. Bibliography.  2Mpp.  5")( 8!i.                    65058·3 Pa. $7.95 
           INTRODUCnON  TO QUANTUM  M.:CHANICS  With Applications  to Chern· 
           istry.  Linus  P.duling Be  E. Bright  Wilson. Jr.  Classit' undergraduate text   by Nobel 
           Prize  winner  applies  quantum  mechanics  to chemical  and  physical  problems. 
           Numerous  tables and  figures  enhance  the text. Chapl .. r bibliographies.  Appen· 
           dices. Index. "I68pp. 5" )( 81i.                                        6-t871-O Pa. $1 \.95 
           ASYMPTOTIC  EXPANSIONS OF INTEGRALS.  Norman Bleistein &: Richard A. 
           Handelsman.  Best illlroduction  to important  field with applications  in a variety of 
           scientific  disciplines.  New  prefal:e. Problems.  Diagrams.  Tables.  Bibliography. 
           Index.  448pp. 5")( 8!i.                                                65082-0 Pa. $12.95 
           MATHEMATICS  APPLIED  TO CONTINUUM  MECHANICS.  Lee A. Segel. 
           Analyzes models of (\uid flow and solid deformation.  For upper·level  math. science 
           and engineering  students.  608pp. 516 x 8!i.                           65369-2 P.d. $13.95 
           ELEMENTS  OF  REAL  ANALYSIS.  David  A.  Sprecher.  Classic  text  covers 
           fundamental  concepts.  real number  system. point selS. functions  of a real variable. 
           Fourier  series. much  more. Over 500 exercises. 352pp. 5l6)( 8!i.  65385-4 P.d. $10.95 
           PHYSICAL PRINCIPLESOFTHE  QUANTUM THEOR Y. Werner Heisenberg. 
            NdbelLaureate  discusses qualllum  theory.  uncertainty.  wave mechanics.  work of 
           Dirac. Schroedinger.  Compton.  Wilson. Einstein.  etc. 184pp. 5l6)( 8!i. 
                                                                                     60115·7 Pa. $5.95 
           INTRODUCTORY  REAL ANALYSIS. A.N. Kolmogorov.  S.V. Fomin.  Trans-
            lated by Richard  A. Silverman.  SeU·contained.  evenly paced introduction  to real 
           and functional  analysis.  Some 350 problems.  "I05pp. 516 x Sli.         61226·0 Pa. $9.95 
            PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS  IN QUANTl J M CHEMISTRY  AND PHYSICS. 
            Charles  S. Johnson.  Jr. and Lee G. Pedersen. Unusually  varied problems. detailed 
            solutions  in coverage of quantum  mechanics.  wave mechanics.  angular  momen-
            tum.  molecular  spectroscopy.  scattering  themy.  more.  280 problems  plus  159 
            supplemelllary  exercises. 450pp. 6!i x 9\4.                           652!16-X P'd. $12.95 
                              CATAl.O(;  OF DOJlER  BOOKS 
         ASYMPTOTIC  METHODS  IN ANALYSIS. N.G. d~ Bruijn.  An inexpensive. 
         rompreh~n.iv~ guidf' 10 asymptotic m~thods-th~ pion~ring work that t~ach~ by 
         ~xplaining wark~ ~xamples in df'lail. Index. 224pp. 5")( 8,..    64221-6 Pa. $6.95 
         OPTICAL RESONANCE AND TWO-LEVEL ATOMS. L. Allen andJ.H.  E~r1y. 
         Clear. comprehensive introduction  to basic principl~ ~hind all quantum  optical 
         resonance phenomena.  5! illustrations.  Pr~face. Index. 256pp. 5" )( 8lf. 
                                                                          65511!·4 Pa. $7.95 
         COMPLEX  VARIABLES. Fnncis  J.  Flanigan.  Unulual  approach.  delayinl 
         complex  alBdJn  till  harmonic  functions  have ~ analyzed from real variable 
         viewpoint. Inclu~ problems with answers. 564pp. 5!6)( Blf.        61588-7 Pa. SI.95 
         ATOMIC SPECTRA AND ATOMIC STRUCTURE;  Gerhard Herz~. One of 
         ~t introductions;  ~pecially for specialist in other  fields. Treatment  is physical 
         nther  than mathematical.  80 iIIustrationL  257pp. 5")( 8,..     &O115-! Pa. $6.95 
         APPLIED COMPLEX VARIABLES. John W. Dettman. St~p-by·step coy~nF of 
         fundamentals of analytic function  theory-plus  lucid exposition of five important 
         applications:  Pot~ntial Theory; Ordinary  Diff~r~ntial Equations;  Fourier Tnns-
         forms;  Laplac:r  Tnnsforms;  Asymptotic  Expansions.  66  filU~. Exerci~ at 
         chapter ends. 512pp. 5")( 8,..                                  64670·X Pa. $11.95 
         ULTRASONIC ABSORPTION: An Introduction  to th~ Theory of Sound Absorp-
          tion and Dispersion in Ga~s. Liquids and Solids. A.B. Bhatia. Standard reference 
          in  th~ fi~ld provid~ a clear.  syst~matically organized  introductory  revi~ of 
          fundamental conc:rpts far advan~ graduate students. research workers. Numerous 
          dialfams.  Bibliography.  44Opp. 5!6)( 8,..                     64917·2 Pa. $11.95 
          UNBOUNDED  LINEAR  OPERATORS:  Theory  and  Applications.  Seymour 
          Gold~g. Classic presents sYltematic treatment of the theory of unboun~ linear 
          open tors in  norm~ linear  Ipac:rI  with  applications  to differential  equation •. 
          Bibliography.  199pp. !il6)( 8,..                                648!1O-1l Pa. $7.95 
          LIGHT SCATTERING  BY SMALL PARTICLES. H.C. van de HulaL Compre· 
          hensive  treatment  includinl  full  nn!Je  of  u~ful approximation  methods  for 
          r~searchera in chemistry.  meteorolOlY and  astronomy.  44 iIIultrations.  47Opp. 
          5!6)( 81i.                                                      64228·! Pa. $11.95 
          CONFORMAL  MAPPING ON RIEMANN SURFACES. Harvey Cohn. Lucid. 
          insightful  book pre~nl5 id~al cov~nF of subject. !!4 ~x~rci~s mak~ book perfect 
          for ~If·study. 55 figu~. !52pp.  S!6 )( 81t                      64025·6 Pa. $9.95 
          OPTICKS.  Sir  Isaac  N~wton. N~ton's own  experiments  with  spectroscopy. 
          colors.  I~n~. rdlection.  rdraction.  etc .•  in  languaF  the  layman  can  follow. 
          Foreword by AI~rt Ein8t~in. 5!2pp. 5!6 )( 8,..                   60205·2 Pa. $9.95 
          GENERALIZED INTEGRAL  TRANSFORMATIONS.  A.H. Zemanian. Gndu· 
          at~·I~el study  of  reemt  Fn~lizations of  th~ Laplace.  Mellin.  Hank~l. K. 
          W~ierstnlS. convdlution  and other limpl~ transformations.  Bibliography.  lI2Opp. 
          5!6 )( 8,..                                                      65575·7 Pa. SI.95 
                               CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
         THE ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD. Albert Shadowiu.  Compreben.ive  under· 
         graduate  tnt covers basics of electric and magnetic fields. builds up to elecuomag-
         netic theory.  Also rt'lated topics.  including  relativity.  Over 900 problema. 768pp. 
         S!6 )( 814.                                                       65660-8 Pa. SI8.9S 
         FOURIER  SERIES. Georgi  P. Tolstov.  Translated  by Richard  A. Silverman.  A 
         valuable  addition  to the literature  on the subject.  moving  clearly from .ubjeet  to 
         subject and theorem to theorem.  107 problems. answers. 556pp. ~)( 8"-
                                                                            65517-9 Pa. S8.95 
          THEORY  OF ELECTROMAGNETIC  WAVE PROPAGATION.  Quarles Her-
          ach Papas. Graduate-Ievel_tudy  discusses the Maxwell field equations.  radiation 
          from wire antennas.  the Doppler  e(feet and more. xiii + 244pp. ~ )( 8If. 
                                                                             65678-0 Pa. S6.95 
          DISTRIBUTION  THEORY  AND TRANSFORM  ANALYSIS: An Introduction 
          to Generalized  Functions.  with Applications.  A.H. umaniah.  Provides ba.ics of 
          distribution  theory.  dt'5CTibes generalized  Fourier  and  Laplace  transformations. 
          Numerous  problems.  584pp. S" )( 81i.                             6S479-6 Pa. S9.95 
          THE PHYSICS OF WAVES. William  C. Elmore and  Mark A. Heald.  Unique 
          overview  of classical  wave theory.  Acoustics. optics.  electromagnetic  radiation. 
          more. Ideal as classroom  text or for self-study. Problems.  477pp. ~)( 8If. 
                                                                            64926-1 Pa. S 12.95 
          CALCULUS  OF VARIATIONS  WITH  APPLICATIONS.  GeoFge M. Ewing. 
          Applications-oriented   introduction  to  variational  theory  deftlopa  insight  and 
          promotes  understanding     of  specialized  books.  research  papen.  Suitable  for 
          advanced undergraduate/graduate  students as primary, supplementary  text. 552pp. 
          S!6)( 81i.                                                         64856-7 Pa. $8.95 
          A TREATISE  ON ELECTRICITY  AND MAGNETISM,  James Clerk Maxwell. 
          Important  foundation  work of modem  physic •. Brings  to final  form  Maxwell', 
          theory of elfftromagnetism  and  rigorously  derives his general  equations  of field 
          theory.  1.084pp. 5!6)( 81i.               60656-8.60657·6 Pa., Two-vol. let $21.90 
          AN INTRODUCTION  TO THE CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS, Charles Fox. 
          Graduate·level  text covers variation_of  an integral.  isoperimetrical  problema,least 
          action.  special relativity.  approximations,  more. References. 279pp. ~)( 8If. 
                                                                             65499-0 Pa. S7.9S 
          HYDRODYNAMIC AND HYDRO MAGNETIC STABILITY, S. Otancbasekhar. 
          Lucid examination  of the Rayleigh· Benard problem; clear coverage of the theory of 
          instabilities  causing  convection.  704pp. 5" )( 814.           64071-X Pa. S14.95 
          CALCULUS OF VARIATIONS.  Robert Weinstock. Basic introduction  covering 
          isoperimetric  problems. theory of elasticity, quantum  mechanics, elec:troltatia.  etc. 
          Exercises throughout.  526pp. 5" )( 81i.                           65069-2 Pa. $8.9S 
          DYNAMICS  OF  FLUIDS  IN  POROUS  MEDIA.  Jacob  Bear. For  advanced 
          students  of ground  water  hydrology.  soil  mechanics  and  phyaia.  drainage  and 
          irrigation  engineering  and more. 555 illustrations.  Exercises. with answers. 7&tpp. 
          ~ )( 9\4.                                                         65675-6 Pa. SI9.95 
                                 CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
          NUMERICAL  METHODS  FOR SCIENTISTS  AND  ENGINEERS.  Richard 
          Hamming.  Classic  text strelKl  frequency  approach  in coverage of algorithms. 
          polynomial  approximation.       Fourier  approximation.      exponential  approxima-
          tion. other topia.  Revised and enlarged  2nd edition.  721pp. 5J6 x 8lt 
                                                                                65241-6 Pa. $14.95 
          THEORETICAL  SOUD STATE PHYSICS. Vol. I: Perfect Lattices in Equilib-
          rium;  Vol. II:  Non-Equilibrium  and  D~. William  Jones  and  Norman  H. 
          March.  Monumental  reference work covers fundamental  theory of equilibrium 
          properties  of perfect  crystalline  solids,  non-equilibrium   properties.  defects and 
          disordered  .ystelDL Appendices.  Problems.  Preface.  Diagrams.  Index.  Bibliog-
          raphy. Total oll.Hlpp.  5J6 x 8"- Two volumes.                 Vol. I 650IS-4 Pa.II4.95 
                                                                        Vol. 1165016-2 Pa. $14.95 
          OPTIMIZATION  THEORY  WITH APPUCATIONS,  Donald A. Pierre. Broad-
          spectrum approach  to important  topic. Classit-al theory of minima  and maxima. 
          calculus  of variations.  simplex  technique  and  linear  programming,  more. Many 
          problems. examples. 6tOpp. 5" x 8Ii.                                 652O!i-X Pa. 114.9S 
          THE CONTINUUM:  A Critical  Examination  of the  Foundation  of Analysis. 
          Hermann  Weyl. Classic  ol 2Oth-century  foundational  fese-.rch deals  with  the 
          conceptual  problem  posed by the continuum.  156pp. 5" x lli.         67982-9 Pa. 15.95 
          ESSAYS ON THE THEORY  OF NUMBEllS.  Richard  Dedekind. Two classic 
          nsay. by pat German mathematician:  on the theory of irrational  numbers; and on 
          tnnsfUtite  numben and properties  of natural  numbers.  IISpp.  5J6 x 8lt 
                                                                                 21010-5 Pa. $4.95 
          THE FUNCTIONS  OF MATHEMATICAL  PHYSICS. Harry Hochstadt. Com· 
          prehenaiw  treaUllelltol orthopmal  polynomials.  hYpelFOlDetric functions, Hill'. 
          equation.  much more. Bibliopaphy.  Index. 522pp. 5!6 Ie 8"-           65214-9 Pa. $9.95 
          NUMBER  THEORY  AND  ITS  HISTORY,  Oystein  Ore.  Unusually  clear. 
          aa:esaible  inttoduction  coven  counting.  properties  of numbers.  prime  numbers. 
          much 1IIOJ'f:. Bibliopaphy.  580pp. 5" x 8"-                           65620-9 Pa. $9.95 
          THE  VARIATIONAL  PR.lNClPLES  OF  MECHANICS,  Cornelius  Lanczos. 
          Graduate  !nel rowrage  ol calculus of variations. equationa  of motiun.  reialivistit-
           mechania.  1IIOJ'f:. Fint inexpensive  paperbound  Nilioll  o( dasaic  lrealise. Index. 
           Bibliopaphy.  418pp. 5J6 Ie IlL                                      65067-7 Pa. $11.9S 
           MATHEMATICAL  TABLES  AND FORMULAS,  Robert  D. Carmichael  and 
           Edwin  R.  Smith.  Logarithm.,  .ines,  tangent.,  trig  functions.  powers,  rooll. 
           reciprocals. exponential  and hyperbolic functions. formulas and theorem •. 269pp. 
           5J6 Ie a                                                               60111-0 Pa. $6.95 
           THEORETICAL  PHYSICS. Georg JOOI. with Ira M. Freeman. Classic overview 
           cowen nsential  math, mcchania,  electl'OlDllgl1et theory. thermodynamia.  quan· 
           tUID mechanics.  nuclear  physics,  other  topica.  Fint  paperback  edition.  xxiii  + 
           885pp. 5!6 Ie IlL                                                    65227-0 Pa. $19.95 
                               CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
         HANDBOOK  OF  MATHEMATICAL  FUNCTIONS  WITH  FORMULAS, 
         GRAPHS,  AND MATHEMATICAL  TABLES, edited by MillOn Abramowiu  and 
         Irene A. Stqun.  Vast compendium:  29 leU of tables. some to as high as 20 places. 
         1.CH6pp. 8 x lOlL                                                  61272-4 Pa. $24.95 
         MATHEMATICAL  METHODS  IN PHYSICS AND ENGINEERING,  John W. 
         Deuman. Algebraically  based approach  to vectors.  mapping,  diffraction,  other 
         topica in applied  math. Also generalized functions.  analytic  function  theory, more. 
         Exercises. 448pp. 5")( 81'-                                         65649-7 Pa. 19.95 
         A SURVEY OF NUMERICAL  MATHEMATICS.  David M. Young and Roben 
         Todd  Gregory.  Broad  self-contained  coverage  of  computer-oriented      numerical 
         algorithms  f9l' solving  variOUI type. of mathematical problems    in linear  algebra, 
         prdinary  and  partial,  differential  equations,  much  more.  Exercises.  TOtal  of 
          1.248pp. 5")( 8li. Two volumes.                             Vol. 165691-8 p..a. 114.95 
                                                                     Vol. II 65692·6 p. ... 114.95 
          TENSOR ANALYSIS FOR PHYSICISTS,  J.A. Schouten.  Concise exposition  of 
          the  mathematical  buia of tensor  analysis.  integrated  with  well-chosen  physical 
          examples  of the theory. Exercises. Index. Bibliography.  289pp. 516)( 8lL 
                                                                              65582-2 Pa. $8.95 
          INTRODUCTION  TO NUMERICAL  ANALYSIS (2nd Edition),  F.B. Hilde· 
          brand.  Claasic. fundamental  treatment  covers computation.  approximation.  inter· 
          polation.  numerical  differentiation  and integration.  other  topics.  150 new prob-
          lems. 669pp. 5f6 x &i.                                            65!16S-5 Pa. $15.95 
          INVESTIGATIONS  ON THE THEORY OF THE BR.OWNIAN MOVEMENT, 
          Albert Einatein.  Five papers (1905-8) investipting  dynamics  of Brownian  motion 
          and evolving elementary  theory.  Notes by R. Fiinh.  122pp. 5")( &i. 
                                                                              60504-0 Pa. $4.95 
          CATASTROPHE  THEORY  FOR  SCIENTISTS  AND  ENGINEERS,  Robert 
          Gilmore.  Advanced-level  treatment  describes  mathematics  of theory grounded  in 
          the work of Poincare, R. Thorn, other mathenaaticians.  Also important  applications 
          to problems  in  mathematics,  physics.  chemistry  and  engineering.  1981 edition. 
          References. 28 tables. 597 black-and· white i1lustrations.  xvii + 666pp.  61\ )( ~. 
                                                                            67559·4 p. ... $1'6.95 
          AN INTRODUCTION  TO STATISTICAL  THERMODYNAMICS,  Terrell  L. 
          Hill.  Excellent  basic  text  offers  wide-ranging  coverage  of  quantum  ltatiltical 
          mechanics.  syawOI  of  interacting  molecules.  quantum  ltatiatiu.  nwre.  525pp. 
          5f6x&i.                                                            65242·4 Pa. 112.95 
          ELEMENTARY  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS.  Wi1liam Teet Martin and Eric 
          Reiamer.  Exceptionally  clear. comprehensive  introduction  at undergraduate  level. 
          Nature  and origin  of differential  equations,  differential  equations  of first, second 
          and higher orders. Picard,'. Theorem.  much more. Problems with solutions.  551 pp. 
          5f6 )( &i.                                                          65024·5 Pa. $8.95 
          STATISTICAL  PHYSICS.  Gregory  H. Wannier.  Classic text combines  thermo-
          dynamica,  statistical  mechanica  and kinetic  theory  in one unified  presentation  of 
           thermal phyaics. Problema with solutiona.  Bibliography.  552pp. 5" x 8lL 
                                                                            6540I·X  Pa. 112.95 
                                  CATALOG  OF DOVER  BOOKS 
          ORDINARY  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS,  Morris  Tenenbaum  and  Harry 
          Pollard.  Exhaustive survey of ordinary diUerential equations  for undergraduates  in 
          mathematics,  engineering,  science.  Thorough  analysis  of  theorems.  Diagrams. 
          Bibliography.  Index. 818pp. 5" x 81i.                                  64940-7 Pa. $16.95 
          STATISTICAL  MECHANICS:  Principles  and  Applications,  Terrell  L.  Hill. 
          Standard  text  covers  fundamentals  of  statistical  mechanics,  applications            to 
          fluctuation  theory, imperfect gases, distribution  functions,  more. 448pp. 5" lC 81t 
                                                                                  65590-0 Pa. $11.95 
          ORDINARY DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS  AND STABILITY THEORY:  An 
          Introduction,    David  A.  Sanchez.  Brief,  modem  treatment.  Linear  equation, 
          stability  theory (or autonomous  and nonautonomous  systems, etc. 164pp. 5" lC 81t 
                                                                                    65828-6 Pa. $5.95 
          THIRTY  YEARS THAT SHOOK  PHYSIC,s: The Story of Quantum  Theory, 
          ~orge Gamow. Lucid, accessible introduction  to influential  theory o( energy and 
           mall4~r. Careful  explanations  of Dirac's  anti-particles,  Bohr's  model of the atom, 
          much more. 12 plates. Numerous  drawings.  240pp. 5" x 8li.              24895-X Pa. $6.95 
           THEORY  OF MATRICES,  Sam  Perlis. Outstanding  text ("Overing rank,  non-
           5ingularity and inverse5 in connection  with the df'velopment of canonical  matrices 
           IIndf'r thf' rdation  of equivalf'nce.  and  without  the intervention  of determinants. 
           Includes exercises. 2!17pp. 5* x 8li.                                   668IO-X Pa. $7.95 
           GREAT  EXPERIMENTS  IN  PHYSICS:  Firsthand  Accounts  from  Calileo  to 
           Einstein,  edited  by  Morris  H.  Shamos.  25 crucial  discoveries:  Newton's  laws of 
           motion,  Chadwick's  study of the neutron,  Heru on electromagnetic  waves, more. 
           Original  accounts clearly annotated.  !l70pp. 5* lC 8li.               25546-5 Pa. $10,95 
           INTRODUCTION  TO PARTIAL  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS  WITH AP-
           PLICATIONS,  E.C.  Zachmanoglou  and  Dale  W.  Thoe.  Essentials  of  partial 
           differential  equations  applied  to  common  problems  in  engineering  and  the 
           physical  sciences. Problems and answers. 416pp. 5* x 81t               65251-5 Pa. $10.95 
           BURNHAM'S CELESTIAL HANDBOOK, Robert Burnham. Jr. Thorough  guide 
           to  the  stars  beyond  our  solar  system.  Exhaustive  treatment.  Alphabetical  by 
           constellation:  Andromeda to  Cetus in Vol. I; Chamaeleon  to Orion  in Vol. 2; and 
           Pavo to Vulpecula  in Vol. 5. Hundreds  of illustrations.  Index in Vol. 5. 2,OOOpp. 
           6" x 9....                        25567-X, 2!1568-8. 25675-0 Pa., Three-vol. set $4"1.85 
           CHEMICAL  MAGIC, L('nnard A. Ford. Sef'ond Edition.  Revised by E. Winston 
           Grundmeier.  Over  100 unusual.slIlIlts  demonstrating  cold fire, dust explosions, 
           much  more.  Text  explains  scientifk  principles  and  stresses safety precautions. 
           I 28pp. 5* x 8li.                                                        67628-5 Pa. $5.95 
           AMATHJR  ASTRONOMF.R'S  HANDBOOK, J.B. Sidgwick. Timeless, compre-
           hI'Tlsive coverage  of  telf'5('ol>f'S, mirrors,  If'nses,  mountings,    tdescope  drives, 
           micrometers,  spectroscopes,  more.  189 illustrations.  576pp. 5" x 8 .... (Available in 
           U.S. only)                                                               24034-7 Pa. $9.95 
                                  CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
          SPECIAL  FUNCTIONS.  N.N. Lebedev. Translated  by Richard  Silverman.  Fa-
          mous Russian work treating  more important  special func:t.ioDi. with applications 
          to specific problems of physics and engineering.  58 figura.  lI08pp. R  Ie 8Il. 
                                                                                  60624-4 Pa. $8.95 
          OBSERVATIONAL  ASTRONOMY FOR AMATEURS.J.B.  Sidpick.  Mine of 
          useful  data  for observation  of lun.  moon.  planets.  asteroids.  aurorae.  meteors, 
          comets. variables. binaries. etc. 59 illustration  •. 584pp. R  Ie 8IC. (Available in U.S. 
          only)                                                                   24055-9 Pa. $8.95 
          INTEGRAL  EQlIA110NS.  F.G. Tricomi.  Authoritative.  well-written  uatmmt 
          of extremely useful mathematical  tool with wide applications.  Volterra Equation •• 
          Fredholm  Equations.  much  more.  Advanced undergraduate  to graduate  level. 
          Exercises. Bibliography.  258pp. 516 Ie 81i.                            64828-1 Pa. $7.95 
           POPULAR  LF.CTURF.S ON  MATHEMATICAl.  l.OGIC.  Hao Wang.  Noted 
           logician's  lucid  treatment  of historical  developments.  set theory.  model  theory. 
           recursion  theory  and  constructivism.  proof  theory.  more.  5 appendixes.  Bibli-
          ography.  1981 t'dition.  ix + 2SSpp. 5,.)( SK.                          67652-5 Pa. $8.95 
           MODERN NONLINEAR EQUATIONS. Thomas L  Saaty. Emphasizes practical 
           solution of problems; covers seven typea of equations.  " ... a welcome contribution 
           to the existing  literature ... . "-Math  RtNiftlll.  49Opp. R  Ie BIi. 64252-1 Pa. SII.95 
           FUNDAMENTALS OF ASTRODYNAMICS. Roger Bate et al. Modem approach 
           developed  by  U.S.  Air  Force  Academy.  Designed  as  a  first  course.  Problems. 
           exercises. Numerous  illustrations.  455pp. 516)( 81i.                  60061-0 Pa. $9.95 
           INTRODUCTION  TO LINEAR  ALGEBRA  AND DIFFERENTIAL  EQUA-
           TIONS. John W. Deuman. Excellent text coven complex numbers. determinants. 
           orthonormal  bases. Laplace  transforms.  much  more.  Exercises with  solutions. 
           Undergraduate  level. 416pp. 516)( 8Ii.                               65191-6 Pa. $10.95 
           INCOMPRESSIBLE  AERODYNAMICS. edited by Bryan ThwaiteL  Coven the0-
           retical and experimental  treatment of the uniform Dow of air and viscoUs Duids palt 
           two-dimensional  aerofoilsand  three-dimenaional  ~ings; manyothtT lOpia. 654pp. 
           516 )( SK.                                                             65465-6 Pa. $16.95 
           INTRODUCTION  TO DIFFERENCE EQUATIONS. Samuel GoIcibeq. Exap-
           tionally  clear exposition  of important  discipline  with  applications  to aoc:iolou. 
           psychology.  economics.  Many illustrative  examples;  over 250 problems. 260pp. 
           5")( SK.                                                                6!1084-7 Pa. S7.95 
           l.AMINAR  BOUNDARY LAYERS. edhed by L  llosenheacL Encineeringclassic 
           covers  steady  boundary  layers  in  two- and  three-dimensional  Dow.  unllady 
           boundary  layers. stability. observational  techniques.  much more. 708pp. 51- 8Il. 
                                                                                  65646-2 Pa. $18.95 
           LECTURES  ON CLASSICAL DIFFERENTIAL  GEOMETRY.  Second Edition. 
           Dirk  J.  Suuik.  Excellent  brief  introduction  coven  curves,  theory  of .urfaces. 
           fundamental  equations.  geometry on a surface. conformal  mapping.  other topics. 
           Problems. 24Opp. R  )( SIi.                                             65609-8 Pa. $8.95 
                                CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
          ROT AR Y -WING AERODYNAMICS, W.z. Stepniewski. Clear, concise text covers 
          aerodynamic  phenomena  of the  rotor  and  offers guidelines  for  helicopter  per. 
          formance evaluation.  Originally  prepaml  for NASA. 557 figures. 640pp. 6" x 914. 
                                                                              64647-5 Pa. $15.95 
          DIFFERENTIAL  GEOMETRY,  Heinrich  W. Guggenheimer.  Local differential 
          seometry  as an application  of advanced calculus  and  linear  algebra.  Curvature, 
          transformation  groups.  surfaces. more. Exerciaea. 62 figures. 578pp. M6 x 81i. 
                                                                               65455-7 Pa. $8.95 
          INTRODUCTION  TO SPACE DYNAMICS. William Tyrrell Thomson.  Com· 
          prehensive.  classic  introduction  to space-night  engineering  for advanced  under-
          graduate  and graduate  studenll.  Includes vector algebra,  kinematics,  transforma-
          tion of coordinates.  Bibliography.  Index. 552pp. 5" x 81t.         65115-4 Pa. $8.95 
          A SURVEY OF MINIMAL SURFACES, Robert Osserman.  Up·to-date,  in-depth 
          diacullion  of the field for advanced Itudenta. Corrected and enlarged edition  coven 
          new developments.  Includes numerous  problems.  192pp. 5" x 81i. 
                                                                               64998·9 POd. $8.95 
          ANALYTICAL  MECHANICS  OF GEARS,  l-:arle Buckingham.  Indispenlable 
          reference for modern gear manufacture  covers conjugate  gear-tooth  action,  gear-
          tooth  profiln  of various  gears, many other  topics. 265 rigures.  \02 tables. 546pp. 
          M6 x 81i.                                                           65712-4 Pa. $14.95 
          SET THEORY  AND LOGIC,  Robert  R. Stoll.  Lucid  introduction  to uniried 
          theory of mathematical  concepts. Set theory and logic seen as tools for conceptual 
          understanding  of real number  system. 496pp. 5" x 814.             6lJ829·4 P-d. $12.95 
          A 
             HISTORY  OF MECHANICS,  Ren~ Dugas. Monumental  study of mechanical 
          principln  from antiquity  to quantum  mechanics. Contributions  of ancient Greeks. 
          Galileo,  Leonardo,  Kepler. Lagrange,  many otherl.  671pp. 5" x 81i. 
                                                                               65652-2 Pa. $14.95 
          FAMOUS  PROBLEMS  OF  GEOMETRY  AND  HOW  TO  SOLVE  THEM, 
          Benjamin  Bold. Squaring  the circle,  trisecting  the angle,  duplicating  the cube: 
          learn  their  history,  why  they are  impollible  to solve,  then  solve them  yourself. 
           128pp. 5" IC 81i.                                                    24297 -8 Pa. $1.95 
           MECHANICAL  VIBRATIONS,  J.P.  Den Hartog.  Cla~sk textbook o[(efll ludd 
          explanationland  iIIuatrative models, applying  theories of vibrations  to a variety of 
           practical  industrial  engillffring  problems.  Numerous  figun,s.  2lJlJ  problems, 
           IOlutions. Appendix.  Index. Preface. 456pp. 5" x 811.              64711f>·.j POd. $\0.95 
           CURVATURE  AND HOMOLOGY,  Samuel I. Goldberg. Thorough  treat men! of 
           specialized branch of differential  geometry. Covers Riemannian  manifolds,  topol-
           ogy of differentiable  manifolds, compact Lie groups, other topks.  l-:xercises. lJ 15pp. 
           M6IC81i.                                                            6HI4·X  Pa. $9.95 
           HISTORY  OF STRENGTH  OF MATERIALS, Stephen  P. Timoshenko.  Excel-
           lent  historical  survey of  the  strength  of  materials  with  many  references to  the 
           tbeorin  of elallicity  and structure.  245 figures. 452pp. 5" x 81i.  61187-6 Pa. $ 11.95 
                               CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
         GEOMETRY  OF COMPLEX  NUMBERS, Hans Schwerdtfeger. Illuminating, 
         widely prailed  book on analYlic geometry of circles, the Moebius uansformalion, 
         and two-dimensional  non-Euclidean  geome&ries. 200pp. 5" )( B!4. 
                                                                            65B50-B Pa. $8:95 
         MECHANICS, J.P. Den Hanog. A classicinuoduclOry  texl orrefresher.  Hundreds 
         of applicaliona  and design problems illuminate  fundamentals  of uuaSe5, loaded 
         beams and cables, elc. 554 answered problema. 462pp. 5" )( Bli.    60754-2 Pa. $9.95 
         TOPOLOGY,  John G. Hocking  and Gail S. Young. Superb one-year course in 
         classicallOpOlogy. Topological  Spacel  and funClions, poim-sel  IOpology, much 
         1'IlOJe.  Examples and problems. Bibliography.  Index. 584pp. 5")( 814. 
                                                                            65676-4 Pa. $9.9!'1 
         STIlENGTH  OF MATERIALS, J.P. Den Hanog.  Full, dear areaamem of basic 
          maaerial (tension,  torsion,  bt-nding, etc.) plus advana-d  malerial on engineering 
          methods, applications.  550 answered problema. 525pp. 5" )( Bli.  60755-0 PO •. $8.95 
          ELEMENTAllY  CONCEPTS  OF TOPOLOGY,  Paul  Alexandroff.  Elegam, 
          inluilive  approach  10 topology from sea-theoretic lopology  10 Belli groups;  how 
          conceplS of IOpology are useful in math and physics. 25 figures. 57pp. 5" )( Bli. 
                                                                            60747-X Pa. $5.50 
          ADVANCED STIlENGTH  OF MATERIALS, J.P. Den Hanog. Superbly written 
          advanced  IeXt covers torsion,  rotating  disks, n.embrane  sareSSe5 in  shells, much 
          more. Many problems and answers. 588pp. 5")( Bli.                 65407-9 Pa. $9.95 
          COMPUTABIUTY  AND UNSOLVABIUTY,  Marlin  Davis. Classic graduale-
          level inuoduction  10  theory  of computability,  uaually  referred to as Iheory o( 
          recurrent funClions. New preface and appendix.  28Bpp. 5")( Bli. 61471-9 Pa. 57.95 
          GENEIlAL CHEMISTIl Y, Linus Pauling. Reviled 5rd edition of classic firsl-year 
          text  by  Nobel  laureate.  Atomic  and  molecular  structure,  quantum  mechanics, 
          atatiltical  mechanics,  thermodynamics  correlated  wilh  deacriplive  chemistry. 
          Problema. 992pp. 51)( 8!L                                        65622-5 Pa. $19.95 
          AN INTIlODUCI10N  TO MA TIlICES, SETS AND GROUPS FOR SCIENCE 
          STUDENTS,  G. Stephenson.  Concise, readable text inaroduces selS. groups, and 
          IDOIt importantly, matrices  10 undergraduate  llucienlS of physics, chemiaary, and 
          engineering.  Problems.  l64pp. 51)( 8!L                           65077-4 Pa. $6.95 
          THE HISTORICAL  BACKGROUND OF CHEMISTRY,  Henry M. Leice.ler. 
          Evolution  of ideas, not individual  biography.  Con(:elllrales on formulation  o( a 
          coherent set of chemical laws. 260pp. 51)( Bli.                    61055-5 PO •. 56.95 
          THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF MATHEMATICS:  An. Inaroductory  Essay, Stephan 
          KOmer. SUrveyl the views of Plato, Aristotle, Leibniz Ie Kam concerning  proposi. 
          tiona and  theories of applied  and  pure  mathemalics.  Introducaion.  Two appen· 
          dices. Index. 198pp. 5")( 8!L                                      2504B·2 Pa. S7.9!'1 
          THE DEVELOPMENT OF MODERN CHEMISTR Y, Aaron J. Ihde. AUlhorila· 
           live hillOry of chemistry from ancient  Greek Iheory 10 20th-century  innovalion. 
          Covers major chemists and their discoveries. 209 iIIus&ralioIl5. 14 tables. Bibliog· 
           raphies. Indices. Appendices. as I pp. 5" )( Bli.                64255·6 PO •. SIll. 9'" 
                                      CATALOG  OF DOJlER  BOOKS 
           DE RE MET ALLlCA,  Georgius  Agricola.  The  famous  Hoover  tranllation  of 
           greatest  treatise on technological  chemistry,  engineering,  geology,  mining of early 
           modem timt'S (1556). All 289 original  woodcuts.  65Spp. 611)( II 
                                                                                           60006-S Pa. SIS.95 
           SOME THEORY  OF SAMPLING,  William  Edward.  Deming.  AnalYlil  of the 
           problems,  theory and design of .ampling  techniqut'S for social scientists,  indUitrial 
           managers  and othen  who find statistici  increalingly  illlportant  in their  work.  61 
           tablt'S. 90 figurt'l.  xvii  + 602pp.  5!6)( Sli.                              64684·X Pa. S15.95 
           THE VARIOUS AND INGENIOUS  MACHINES OF AGOSTINO  RAMELLI:  A 
           CIII~sk Sixlffnlh·('.eontury  1II\1~lralf'd Trf'llti!W on Tt-rhnoloRY, Agostino  Ramt'lli. 
           One of tht-most widely known and copied worbon  machinery  in the 16th century. 
           194 detailed  plates of water pumps,  grain  mills,  erant'S, more. 608pp. 9)( 12. 
                                                                                           28180-9 Pa. S24.95 
           LINEAR  PROGRAMMING  AND ECONOMIC  ANALYSIS,  Robert  Dorfman, 
           Paul A. Samuelson  and Robert  M. Solow. First comprehenlive  treatment  of linear 
           programming  in  ltandard  economic  analysis.  Game  theory,  modern welfare 
           economics,  Leantief  input-output,  more.  525pp. 5!6)( ..                      6M91·S Pa. SI-US 
           ELEMENT AR. Y DECISION THEORY, Herman Chernoff and Lincoln E. Moses. 
           Clear  introduction        to  statistics  and  statistical    theory  coven  data  processing, 
           probability  and  random  variablt'S,  testing  hypotht'lt'l.             much  more.  Exercilt'l. 
            564pp.  5")( 8Il                                                                 65218-1 Pa. S9.95 
            THE COMPLEAT  STRATEGYST:  Being a Primer on the Theory  of Gamt'S of 
            Strategy,  J.D.  Williams.  Highly  entertaining  c1allic  dt'lCribes,  with  many  iIIus· 
            trated  examples,  how  to  select  bell  strategit'S  in  conDict  lituationa.             Prefaces. 
            Appendices.  268pp.  5")( Sli.                                                   25101-2 Pa. S7.95 
            MATHEMATICAL  METHODS  OF OPERATIONS  RESEARCH,  Thomas  L. 
            Saaty. Classic graduate· level text coven historical  background.  c1aasical methods of 
            forming  models,  optimization,  game theory,  probability,  queueing  theory,  much 
            more. ExerciSt'S. Bibliography.  44Spp. 5!6 )( 816.                             65705·5 Pa. S12.95 
            CONSTRUCTIONS  AND COMBINATORIAL  PROBLEMS  IN DESIGN  OF 
            EXPERIMENTS,  Damaraju  Raghavarao.  In-depth  reference  work  examiDt'l 
            onhogonal  Latin squart'l,  incomplete  block designl,  tactical configuration,  partial 
            geometry,  much more. Abundant  explanations,  examplt'S, 416pp, 5!6)( 816. 
                                                                                            65685·5 Pa. $10.95 
            THE ABSOLUTE DIFFERENTIAL  CALCULUS (CALCULUS  OF TENSORS), 
            Tullio  Levi·Civita.  Great  2Oth-c:entury mathematician's  elallie  work on material 
            neceuary  for mathematical  grasp of theory of relativity.  452pp. 5!6 )( Ill. 
                                                                                             65401·9 Pa. $9.95 
             VECTOR AND TENSOR ANALYSIS WITH APPLICATIONS,  A.I. Boriamko 
            and I.E. Tarapov:  Concise  introduction.  WorIted-out  problema.  solutionl,  exer· 
             ciSt'S. 257pp. 5!6 )( 816.                                                       65&!1S·2 Pa. $7.95 
                                 CATALOG  OF DOYER BOOKS 
          THE FOUIl-COLOIl  PIlOBLEM:  Assaults and Conquest.  Thomu 1.. Saaly and 
          Paul G. Kainen. Engrolling.  comprehensive  account of the century-old  combina· 
          torial  topological  problem.  ill  history  and  solution.  Bibliopaphia.   Index.  110 
          figures. 228pp. 5" )( 81i.                                            65092-8 Pa. $6.95 
          CATALYSIS  IN  CHEMISTIlY  AND  ENZYMOLOGY.  William  P.  Jencb. 
          Exceptionally  dear  coveratp! of  mechanilml  for  catalysis.  forca  in  aqueous 
          solution.  carbonyl- and  acyl·group  reat:tion ..  practical  kineda,  more. IMpp. 
          5!6 )( 81i.                                                          65460-5 Pa. 119.95 
          PIlOBABILITY:  An Introduction.  Samuel Goldberg. Excellent buic text coven sec 
          theory. probability  theory for finite sample spaces. binomial  theorem. much 1IIOft. 
          !l60 problems.  Bibliographies.  !l22pp. !'i")( 81i.                  65252-1 Pa. $8.95 
          LIGHTNING.  Manin  A. Uman.  Revised. updated edition  of dusic work on the 
          physics  of  lightning.   Phenomena.  terminolOlY.  mealuremmt.  photopaphy. 
          spectroscopy.  thunder.  more.  Ileviews  recent  research.  Bibliopaphy.       Indices. 
          !l2Opp. !'i" )( 814.                                                  64575-4 Pa. 18.95 
          PIlOBABILITY  THEORY:  A ('.oncise Coune. Y.A. Rosanov.  Hishly  readab~. 
          aelf-contained  introduction  coven  combination  of  evenll.  dependent  events, 
          Bernoulli  trials. etc. Translation  by Ilichard Silftnltan.  148pp. SIx IN. 
                                                                                65544·9 Pa. $5.95 
          AN INTIlODUCTlON  TO HAMILTONIAN  OPTICS. H. A. Buchdahl. Detailed 
          account  of the Hamiltonian  treatment  of aberration  theory in tp!OIIletrical optia. 
           Many dalleS  of optical  systema defined  in term.  of the symmetries  they poueII. 
           Problema with detailed solution .. 1970 edition.  xv + !6Opp. 5!6 x 81i. 
                                                                               67597·1 Pa.IIO.95 
          STATISTICS  MANUAL,  Edwin  1..  Crow.  et  al.  Comprehensive.  practical 
          collection  of c .... ical and modern methods  prepared by V.S. Naval Ordnance Test 
          Station.  Stress on use. Buies of ltatiltia  usumed.  288pp. 5!6 x a 
                                                                                60599-X Pa. $6.95 
          DlCTIQNAR Y IOllTUNE  OF BASIC STA11STICS.  John E. Freund and Frank 
          J. Williams.  A c1~ar concise dictionary  qf over I.OOlhtalistical tennsand  an outline 
          of  statistical  formulas  covering  probability.  nonparameuic  teall.  much  moRe 
          208pp. 516 x iii.                                                      66796-0 Pa. $6.95 
          STATISTICAL  METHOD  FIlOM  THE VIEWPOINT  OF QVAUTY  CON· 
          TROL, Walter A. Shewhart.  Important  text explains  replalion  of variabla.  UIeI 
          of statillical  control  to achieve quality  conbOl in industry. qriculture.  CMher area. 
          192pp. SIx iii.                                                        65D2·7  Pa • ..,.95 
          THE INTERPRETATION  OF GEOLOGICAL  PHASE DIAGRAMS. Ernat G. 
          Ehlers.  Clear.  concise  text  emphuizft  diapama  of  lyMemI  under  Ruid  or 
          containing  preuure;  also  cover&tp!  of  complex  binary  ayaeema. hydnMhennal 
           melting.  more. 288pp. 616 x !N.                                    65589-7 Pa. 110.95 
          STATlSTICALADJVSTMENTOFDATA,W.EdwaniaDeminc·lnbOductionto 
          basic concepti  ofltatistics.  curve fitting.  leall squares solution.  conditions without 
           panmeter.  conditions  containing  panmeters.  26 exaasea worked  OUL  271pp. 
           5!6 )( 81i.                                                           64685-8 Pa. $8.95 
                                 CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
          TENSOR CALCULUS. J.L. Synge and A. Schild. Widely used introduClory text 
                         and tensors. basic operations in Riemannian  space. non-Riemannian 
          covers spaces 
          spaces. etc. 524pp. 5" x 81'-                                          65612-7 Pa. 18.95 
          A CONCISE  HISTORY  OF MATHEMATICS.  Dirk J. Struik.  The  beat brief 
          history of mathematics. Stresses oripn. and coven every major figure from andent 
          Near East to 19th century. 41 illu.tration  •. 195pp. 516 x 81t       .60255-9 Pa. 17.95 
          A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS. W. W. Rouse 
          Ball. One of clearest. moat authoritative  IUrveyS  from the Egyptians and Phoeni-
          cians through  19th-century figures such as Grassman.  Galois.  Riemann.  Fourth 
          edition.  522pp. 5!6)( 8".                                            20650-0 Pa. 110.95 
          HISTORY  OF MATHEMATICS.  David E. Smith.  Nontechnical  sUrvey from 
          ancient Greece and Orient to late 19th century; evolution of arithmetic.  geometry. 
                                                             calculus. 562 iIIu5tr.uions. 1.555pp. 
          trigonometry. calculatingdevicn.  algebra. the 
          5!6 x 81t                                    20429-4. 20450-8 po .... Two-vol. set 525.90 
          THE GEOMETRY  OF RENt  DESCARTES. Rene Descartes. The great work 
           founded  analytical  geometry.  Original  French  text.  Descartes' own  diagrams. 
           together with definitive Smith-Latham  translation.  244pp. 5" x Bit. 
                                                                                  60068-8 Pa. 17.95 
          THE ORIGINS  OF THE INFINITESIMAL  CALCULUS.  Margaret E. Baron. 
           Only  fully  detailed  and  documented  account  of  crucial  discipline:  origins; 
           development  by Galileo.  Kepler. Cavalieri;  contributions  of  Newton.  Leibniz. 
           more. 504pp. 5")( BIi. (Available in U.S. and Canada only)            65571-4 Pa. 59.95 
           THE HISTORY OF THE CALCULUS AND ITS CONCEPTUAL  DEVELOP-
           MENT.  Carl  B. Boyer. Origins  in  antiquity.  medieval contributions.  work of 
           Newton. Leibniz. rigorous formulation.  Treatment  it verbal. 546pp. 5" )( Bit 
                                                                                  60509-4 Pa. 5S.95 
           THE THIRTEEN  BOOKS OF EUCLID'S ELEMENTS. tr .. nslated with introdu~" 
           tion and commentary  by Sir Thomas  L  Heath.  Definitive edition.  Textual  and 
           linguistic  nOIn.  mathematical  analysis. 2.500 years of critical commentary.  Not 
           abridFd.  1.414pp. 5")( 81t       60088-2.60089-0.60090-4 Pa., Three-vol. set 129.S5 
           GAMES AND DECISIONS: Introduction  and ('.ritieal Survey. R. Dunnn  Lu(e 
           and Howard Railfa. Superb nontechnical  introduction  lU game thwry.  primarily 
           applied  to  social  sciences.  Utility  theory.  zero-sum  games.  n-person  games, 
           decision-making.  much more. Bibliography. 509pp. 5")( Sli.          65945-7 Pa. 112.95 
           THE  HISTOIUCAL  ROOTS  OF  ELEMENTARY  MATHEMATICS,  Lucas 
           N.H. Bunt, Phillip  S. Jones. and Jack D. Bedient. Fundamental  underpinnings  of 
           modem arithmetic,  algebra, geometry and number  systems derived from ancient 
           civilizations. 52Opp. S")( 81t                                         2SS65-S Pa. 58.95 
           CALCULUS REFltESHER  FOR TECHNICAL  PEOPLE, A. Albert Klaf. Coven 
           important  upecta  of  integral  and  differential  calculus  via  7S6 questions.  S66 
           problema.  IDOIt answered. 451 pp. 5" )( 8".                           20570-0 Pa. $8.9S 
                                 CATALOG  OF DOVER BOOKS 
          CHALLENGING  MATHEMATICAL  PROBLEMS  WITH  ELEMENTARY 
          SOLUTIONS,  A.M. Yaglom and I.M. Yaglom. Over 170challenging  problems on 
          probability  theory,  combinatorial  analysis,  poims  and  lines,  topology,  convex 
          polygons,  many other topics. Solutions.  Total  of 445pp. 5li K 81i. Two-vol. set. 
                                                                         Vol. I 655l16-9 Pa. 17.95 
                                                                        Vol. II 655l17-7 Pa. $6.95 
          FIFTY  CHALLENGING  PROBLEMS  IN  PROBABILITY  WITH  SOLU-
          TIONS,  Fredtrick  MosteJler. Remarkable  puzzlers, graded  in difficulty,  illusttate 
          elementary  and advanced aspeclS of probability.  Detailed solutions.  88pp. 5" K 81i. 
                                                                                65555-2 Pa. $4.95 
          EXPERIMENTS  IN TOPOLOGY,  Stephen  Barr_ Classic, lively explanation of 
          one 0( the byways 0( mathematic..  Klein bottles, Moebius suips,  projective planes, 
          map coloring,  problem  of Ihe Koenigsbt"rg bridges.  much  more, described  with  • 
          clarity and wit. 411 figures. 210pp. 5" K 8".                         259l1!l-1 1" •.  15.95 
          RELATIVITY  IN ILLUSTRATIONS,  Jacob  T.  Schwaru.  Clear  nontechnical 
          ~unent makes relativity  more  acceaaible than  ever before.  Over 60 drawings 
                    conceptS more clearly than text alone. Only high school geomeuy needed. 
          ilIU1uate 
          Bibliography.  128pp. 6!1 )( 916.                                     25965-X Pa. $6.95 
          AN INTRODUCTION  TO ORDINARY  DIFFERENTIAL  EQUATIONS,  Earl 
          A. Coddington.  A thorough  and systematic finl"Course in elementary  differential 
          equations  for undergraduates  in mathematics and science, with many exercises and 
           problema (with answers). Index, 504pp. 5li )( BIi.                    65942·9 Pa. $8.95 
           FOURIER  SERIES AND ORTHOGONAL  FUNCTIONS,  Harry  F. Davis. An 
           incisive text combining  theory and practical  example  to inuoduce  Fourier series, 
           orthopnal  functions  and applications  of tbe Fourier  method  to boundary·value 
           problema,  570 exercises, Answers and notes, 416pp. 5li I( 81l.       6597l1-9 Pa. 19.95 
           THE THEORY  OF BRANCHING  PROCESSES,  Theodore  E. Harris.  «'im 
           ayltrmatic,  (''OIDprdlensive treatment  of branching  (i.e. multiplicative)  processes 
           and  their  applications.   Galton-Watson  mudel.  Markov  branching  proct'Slon. 
           electron-photon  cascade,  many  other  topics.  Rigorous  proofs.  Bibliography. 
           24Opp. 5")( 8Ii.                                                      65952-61" •. $6.95 
           AN  INTRODUcrlON  TO  Al.GEBRAIC  STRUGrURES,  Joseph  Landin. 
           Supt'l'b aelf-fVlltained text covers "abstract  alFbla":  srts and numbt"r..  th('(IJY of 
           groups,  theory of rings,  much  more. Numeruu,  well-('hosen example.,  exenise •. 
           247pp. Slx 8Ii.                                                       65940-2 1" •. 17.95 
                                    h;e •• ''''';«' '0 ellian •• w;,hu .. '  nolie •. 
           Available  at your book dealer or wrile for free Mathematics  and Science CatalOlIO  Dept. CI. 
           Dover Publications,  Inc., !II East 2nd St .• Mineola.  N. Y. 11501. Dover publishes  mOR than 171) 
           boob  each  year  on  Kientt,  elementary  and advanced  mathematics.  biology.  music,  art. 
           lileratUle,  hiltory.  lOCial Kienees  and other  area •. 
