SETS AND ELEMENTS. SUBSETS. 
                      We do not attempt  to define the word.,.  Intuitively  a set is a collec-
              tion, or ",gregale,  or famil'll, or en.semble (all of which words are used synony-
              mously with set) of objects which are called the elementa, or member. of the 
              set, and the set is completely determined  by the knowledge of which objects 
              are elements of it. We may speak, for  example, of the set of students  at a 
               certain. univenity;  the elements of thie set are the individual students  there. 
              Similarly we may lpeak  of the set of all real numbel'l  (to be diacuased in 
              eome detail  in the  next chapter),  or the set of aliitraight  lines in a given 
               plane, etc. It Ihould be noted that the elements of a set may themselves be 
               sets; for example each element of the set of allitraight  lines in a given plane 
               ia a set of points, and we may alao consider such 1881 mathematical  examples 
               .. the set of married couples in a given town, or the set of regiments in an 
               army. 
                       We ehalI generally  use capital  lettel'l  to denote  sets  and  lower-cue 
               letters to denote their  elementa. The Iymbol  E  is used to denote  member-
               ehip in a set, 10 that 
                                                                            zES 
               means that z is an element of the set S. The ltatement  "z ia not an element 
               of S" is abbreviated 
                                                                            zf!S. 
               Inatead  of  writing  a E  S,  b E S,  c E  S  (the  commu  having  the  arne 
                meaning .. "and")  we often write a, b, c E s. 
                        The atatement  that a set is completely determined  by ita elements may 
                be written  .. followa: If X and  Yare sets then  X  .. Y if and only if, for 
                all z, z E  X if and only if z E Y. Equality  here and elsewhere in thia book 
                (denoted by -) means identity;  X and  Y happen to be different Iymbola, 
                but they may very well be different names for the same set, in which case 
                the equation  X - Y means that the sets indicated  by the symbols X aad 
                Y are  the same.  X" Y of COUJ'le means that  the  sets  indicated  by  the 
                aymbola X and  Y are not the same. 
                        ThUi we imagine oUJ'lelves in a world peopled by certain  "objects" 
                (certain  of which are  called "sets"),  and  for some pail'l  of objects  z,  X, 
                wh .. X is a set, we write:e E  X, the symbol  E  having the property  that 
                lwo ... X and Y are equal if and only if for each object z we have z E  X 
                if and only if :Ie E  Y. The symbol E  mUit alao bave other properties  (which 
                we dan't specify here) that enable UB, given certain sets, to construct  otheJ'l. 
                The important tbina is tbat everything which followa is expreBlible in terms 
                01 the fundamental  relation  z E  X. 
                                                               tl._AllD  .........       II 
              Seta are IOmetinuw iDdieated by Iiaciq  III their members between 
         br&cell. For example, the _ 
                                           IJaoe, Jim} 
         baa Jane and .nm .. ita memben, 
                                           (1, 2,3,  ••. ) 
         (with the three dote I'e8d Uaod 10 on")  ie the _  of poeitive inteprB. and 
                                                f-t  . 
         ia the _   having one element. the object  named _. (Note that  f G J ie not 
         the aame .... In the aame way theN ia a ditferenee between a university 
         cluB coDIIiatiDg of one atudent aod the atudent hilDll8lf, or between a com-
         mittee 00DIIiat.i1ll of one peraon and that peraon.) The above notation how-
         ever is not always feuible.  A more frequendy  used notation is 
                                  Iz : (statement involving s)J, 
         which meaoa the aet of all z for which the statement  involving z ia true. 
         Thus 
                                   (s : z ie a poeitive integerJ 
         ia the aet of positive intepra,  and for any aet 8 we have 
                                         8 - fz: zE8). 
         For any aet 8, the aymboI 
                                fs E 8 : (atatement  involviDg z») 
         deDotea the -.me set .. 
                            (z : :i E 8 and (statement involving z) J , 
          which ia the let of all elements of 8 for which the atatement ia true. Thus 
          if R is the .. of real numbers, 
                                   Iz E R : :r:I- l' - (1,  -I). 
               If X and  Y are aeta and every element of X is al80 an element of Y. 
          we a.y that X is a ...., of Y; this is written 
                                       XC Y,  or  Y:JX. 
          Thus  XC Y ie ahorthand  for  the  atatement  "if  z E  X  then  s E  Y". 
          X - Y is equivalent to the two atatements X C  Y and Y C X. If X C  Y 
          aod Y C Z then clearly  X C z; the two &nst atatements are IOmetimea 
          written more aucoinotly                                            . 
                                            XcYCZ. 
                   ,         I.  NO'l'IONa  noll 811T TRIIORT 
                   For auy object  z  and  set  X  the  relation  z E  X  can  now be  written  in 
                    another  (1_ convenient I) way, namely  (zl  eX. The negation of X C Y 
                   •  written                                                          Xtl, Y  or  Y~X. 
                    X. called a JWOPII' eubuI 0/ Y if XC Y but X,. Y. 
                               The em", .., •  the set with no elements. It is denoted by the symbol 
                    91. A IOUI'Ce of confusion to beKinnel'l •  that although  t.he empty let oon-
                    taint  noCIam"  it i .... f is lOfMIAing (namely lOme particular  let,  the  one 
                    characterised by the fact. that. nothing is in it.). The set. (911 •  a let. con-
                    tainilll exactly one element, namely the empty set. (In a similar way, when 
                    dea1in1 
                                         with numbers, lay wit.h ordinary  intepl'l,  we mUit. be careful not 
                     to reprd  the number aero 81 nothing: 181'0 is something, a part.icular num-
                     ber, which repreeents the number of thinp in "nothing".  Thus 181'0 and 91 
                     are quite different, but there is a connection between them in that  the set 
                     91 hu IeIO elements.) Note that  for any set X we have 
                                                                                     III C X  and  XC X. 
                     A epecial cue of both of these statements  is the statement 
                                                                                                        III C Ill, 
                     which occuiont  diJlloulty iI, u  is often  improperly  done,  one ......  'Ije 
                     oontailled in" for both of the symbole C  and  E. The statement  III C III 
                     ia tNe becalMe the statement  "for each z E III we have z E Ill" is obviouely 
                     true,  and  allO  because it is "vacuously  true",  that  is there  is DO z E III 
                     for which the statement  must be verified, just. u  the statement  "all  pip 
                     with winp apeak Chineee" is vacuously true. 
                                                                                                                                      